ACT q
Scene qEnter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, with others.

THESEUS Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour Draws on apace. Four happy days bring in Another moon. But, O, methinks how slow This old moon wanes! She lingers
my desires Like to a stepdame or a dowager Long withering out a young man’s revenue.
HIPPOLYTA Four days will quickly steep themselves in night; Four nights will quickly dream away the time; And then the moon, like to a silver bow New-bent in
heaven, shall behold the night Of our solemnities.
THESEUS  Go, Philostrate, Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments. Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth. Turn melancholy forth to funerals; The pale
companion is not for our pomp. Philostrate exits. Hippolyta, I wooed thee with my sword And won thy love doing thee injuries, But I will wed thee in another key,
With pomp, with triumph, and with reveling. Enter Egeus and his daughter Hermia, and Lysander and Demetrius.

EGEUS Happy be Theseus, our renownèd duke!
THESEUS Thanks, good Egeus. What’s the news with thee?
EGEUS Full of vexation come I, with complaint Against my child, my daughter Hermia.— Stand forth, Demetrius.—My noble lord, This man hath my consent to marry
her.— Stand forth, Lysander.—And, my gracious duke, This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child.— Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes And
interchanged love tokens with my child. Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung With feigning voice verses of feigning love And stol’n the impression of her
fantasy With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits, Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats—messengers Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth. With
cunning hast thou filched my daughter’s heart, Turned her obedience (which is due to me) To stubborn harshness.—And, my gracious duke, Be it so she will not
here before your Grace Consent to marry with Demetrius, I beg the ancient privilege of Athens: As she is mine, I may dispose of her, Which shall be either to
this gentleman Or to her death, according to our law Immediately provided in that case.
THESEUS What say you, Hermia? Be advised, fair maid. To you, your father should be as a god, One that composed your beauties, yea, and one To whom you are but
as a form in wax By him imprinted, and within his power To leave the figure or disfigure it. Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
HERMIA  So is Lysander.
THESEUS  In himself he is, But in this kind, wanting your father’s voice, The other must be held the worthier.
HERMIA I would my father looked but with my eyes.
THESEUS Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
HERMIA I do entreat your Grace to pardon me. I know not by what power I am made bold, Nor how it may concern my modesty In such a presence here to plead my
thoughts; But I beseech your Grace that I may know The worst that may befall me in this case If I refuse to wed Demetrius.
THESEUS Either to die the death or to abjure Forever the society of men. Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires, Know of your youth, examine well your
blood, Whether (if you yield not to your father’s choice) You can endure the livery of a nun, For aye to be in shady cloister mewed, To live a barren sister all
your life, Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon. Thrice-blessèd they that master so their blood To undergo such maiden pilgrimage, But earthlier
happy is the rose distilled Than that which, withering on the virgin thorn, Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.
HERMIA So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, Ere I will yield my virgin patent up Unto his Lordship whose unwishèd yoke My soul consents not to give
sovereignty. 
THESEUS Take time to pause, and by the next new moon (The sealing day betwixt my love and me For everlasting bond of fellowship), Upon that day either prepare
to die For disobedience to your father’s will, Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would, Or on Diana’s altar to protest For aye austerity and single life.
DEMETRIUS Relent, sweet Hermia, and, Lysander, yield Thy crazèd title to my certain right.
LYSANDER You have her father’s love, Demetrius. Let me have Hermia’s. Do you marry him.
EGEUS Scornful Lysander, true, he hath my love; And what is mine my love shall render him. And she is mine, and all my right of her I do estate unto Demetrius.
LYSANDER, to Theseus I am, my lord, as well derived as he, As well possessed. My love is more than his; My fortunes every way as fairly ranked(If not with
vantage) as Demetrius’; And (which is more than all these boasts can be) I am beloved of beauteous Hermia. Why should not I then prosecute my right? Demetrius,
I’ll avouch it to his head, Made love to Nedar’s daughter, Helena, And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes, Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry, Upon this
spotted and inconstant man. 
THESEUS I must confess that I have heard so much, And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof; But, being overfull of self-affairs, My mind did lose
it.—But, Demetrius, come, And come, Egeus; you shall go with me. I have some private schooling for you both.— For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself To fit
your fancies to your father’s will, Or else the law of Athens yields you up (Which by no means we may extenuate) To death or to a vow of single life.— Come, my
Hippolyta. What cheer, my love?— Demetrius and Egeus, go along. I must employ you in some business Against our nuptial and confer with you Of something nearly
that concerns yourselves. 
EGEUS With duty and desire we follow you. All but Hermia and Lysander exit.
LYSANDER How now, my love? Why is your cheek so pale? How chance the roses there do fade so fast?
HERMIA Belike for want of rain, which I could well Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
LYSANDER  Ay me! For aught that I could ever read, Could ever hear by tale or history, The course of true love never did run smooth. But either it was different
in blood— 
HERMIA O cross! Too high to be enthralled to low.
LYSANDER Or else misgraffèd in respect of years—
HERMIA O spite! Too old to be engaged to young.
LYSANDER Or else it stood upon the choice of friends—
HERMIA O hell, to choose love by another’s eyes!
LYSANDER Or, if there were a sympathy in choice, War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, Making it momentany as a sound, Swift as a shadow, short as any
dream, Brief as the lightning in the collied night, That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and Earth, And, ere a man hath power to say “Behold!” The jaws of
darkness do devour it up. So quick bright things come to confusion.
HERMIA If then true lovers have been ever crossed, It stands as an edict in destiny. Then let us teach our trial patience Because it is a customary cross, As
due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs, Wishes and tears, poor fancy’s followers.
LYSANDER A good persuasion. Therefore, hear me, Hermia: I have a widow aunt, a dowager Of great revenue, and she hath no child. From Athens is her house remote
seven leagues, And she respects me as her only son. There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee; And to that place the sharp Athenian law Cannot pursue us. If thou
lovest me, then Steal forth thy father’s house tomorrow night, And in the wood a league without the town (Where I did meet thee once with Helena To do
observance to a morn of May), There will I stay for thee.
HERMIA  My good Lysander, I swear to thee by Cupid’s strongest bow, By his best arrow with the golden head, By the simplicity of Venus’ doves, By that which
knitteth souls and prospers loves, And by that fire which burned the Carthage queen When the false Trojan under sail was seen, By all the vows that ever men
have broke (In number more than ever women spoke), In that same place thou hast appointed me, Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.
LYSANDER Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.

Enter Helena.

HERMIA Godspeed, fair Helena. Whither away?
HELENA Call you me “fair”? That “fair” again unsay. Demetrius loves your fair. O happy fair! Your eyes are lodestars and your tongue’s sweet air More tunable
than lark to shepherd’s ear When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. Sickness is catching. O, were favor so! Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go.
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye; My tongue should catch your tongue’s sweet melody. Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, The rest I’d
give to be to you translated. O, teach me how you look and with what art You sway the motion of Demetrius’ heart!
HERMIA I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
HELENA O, that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
HERMIA I give him curses, yet he gives me love.
HELENA O, that my prayers could such affection move!
HERMIA The more I hate, the more he follows me.
HELENA The more I love, the more he hateth me.
HERMIA His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.
HELENA None but your beauty. Would that fault were mine!
HERMIA Take comfort: he no more shall see my face. Lysander and myself will fly this place. Before the time I did Lysander see Seemed Athens as a paradise to
me. O, then, what graces in my love do dwell That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!
LYSANDER Helen, to you our minds we will unfold. Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold Her silver visage in the wat’ry glass, Decking with liquid pearl the
bladed grass (A time that lovers’ flights doth still conceal), Through Athens’ gates have we devised to steal.
HERMIA And in the wood where often you and I Upon faint primrose beds were wont to lie, Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet, There my Lysander and myself
shall meet And thence from Athens turn away our eyes To seek new friends and stranger companies. Farewell, sweet playfellow. Pray thou for us, And good luck
grant thee thy Demetrius.— Keep word, Lysander. We must starve our sight From lovers’ food till morrow deep midnight.
LYSANDER I will, my Hermia.Hermia exits. Helena, adieu. As you on him, Demetrius dote on you! Lysander exits.
HELENA How happy some o’er other some can be! Through Athens I am thought as fair as she. But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so. He will not know what all
but he do know. And, as he errs, doting on Hermia’s eyes, So I, admiring of his qualities. Things base and vile, holding no quantity, Love can transpose to form
and dignity. Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind; And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind. Nor hath Love’s mind of any judgment taste. Wings, and
no eyes, figure unheedy haste. And therefore is Love said to be a child Because in choice he is so oft beguiled. As waggish boys in game themselves forswear, So
the boy Love is perjured everywhere. For, ere Demetrius looked on Hermia’s eyne, He hailed down oaths that he was only mine; And when this hail some heat from
Hermia felt, So he dissolved, and show’rs of oaths did melt. I will go tell him of fair Hermia’s flight. Then to the wood will he tomorrow night Pursue
her. And, for this intelligence If I have thanks, it is a dear expense. But herein mean I to enrich my pain, To have his sight thither and back again. She
exits. 



Scene wEnter Quince the carpenter, and Snug the joiner, and Bottom the weaver, and Flute the bellows-mender, and Snout the tinker, and Starveling the tailor.

QUINCE  Is all our company here?
BOTTOM  You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.
QUINCE  Here is the scroll of every man’s name which is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the Duke and the Duchess on his wedding
day at night. 
BOTTOM  First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.
QUINCE  Marry, our play is “The most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe.”
BOTTOM  A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.
QUINCE  Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.
BOTTOM  Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.
QUINCE  You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.
BOTTOM  What is Pyramus—a lover or a tyrant?
QUINCE  A lover that kills himself most gallant for love.
BOTTOM  That will ask some tears in the true performing of it. If I do it, let the audience look to their eyes. I will move storms; I will condole in some
measure. To the rest.—Yet my chief humor is for a  tyrant. I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in, to make all split:

 The raging rocks And shivering shocks Shall break the locks Of prison gates. And Phibbus’ car Shall shine from far And make and mar The foolish Fates.

This was lofty. Now name the rest of the players. This is Ercles’ vein, a tyrant’s vein. A lover is more condoling.
QUINCE  Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.
FLUTE  Here, Peter Quince.
QUINCE  Flute, you must take Thisbe on you.
FLUTE  What is Thisbe—a wand’ring knight?
QUINCE  It is the lady that Pyramus must love.
FLUTE  Nay, faith, let not me play a woman. I have a beard coming.
QUINCE  That’s all one. You shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small as you will.
BOTTOM  An I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too. I’ll speak in a monstrous little voice: “Thisne, Thisne!”—“Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! Thy Thisbe dear and
lady dear!” 
QUINCE  No, no, you must play Pyramus—and, Flute, you Thisbe.
BOTTOM  Well, proceed.
QUINCE  Robin Starveling, the tailor.
STARVELING  Here, Peter Quince.
QUINCE  Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s mother.—Tom Snout, the tinker.
SNOUT  Here, Peter Quince.
QUINCE  You, Pyramus’ father.—Myself, Thisbe’s father.—Snug the joiner, you the lion’s part.— And I hope here is a play fitted.
SNUG  Have you the lion’s part written? Pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.
QUINCE  You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
BOTTOM  Let me play the lion too. I will roar that I will do any man’s heart good to hear me. I will roar that I will make the Duke say “Let him roar again. Let
him roar again!”
QUINCE  An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the Duchess and the ladies that they would shriek, and that were enough to hang us all. ALL  That
would hang us, every mother’s son. 
BOTTOM  I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. But I will aggravate my
voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove. I will roar you an ’twere any nightingale.
QUINCE  You can play no part but Pyramus, for Pyramus is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one shall see in a summer’s day, a most lovely gentlemanlike
man. Therefore you must needs play Pyramus.
BOTTOM  Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?
QUINCE  Why, what you will.
BOTTOM  I will discharge it in either your straw-color beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your French-crown-color beard, your perfit
yellow. 
QUINCE  Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play barefaced. But, masters, here are your parts, giving out the parts, and I am to
entreat you, request you, and desire you to con them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. There will we
rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall be dogged with company and our devices known. In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as our play
wants. I pray you fail me not.
BOTTOM  We will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously. Take pains. Be perfit. Adieu.
QUINCE  At the Duke’s Oak we meet.
BOTTOM Enough. Hold or cut bowstrings. They exit.



ACT w
Scene qEnter a Fairy at one door and Robin Goodfellow at another.

ROBIN How now, spirit? Whither wander you?
FAIRY Over hill, over dale, Thorough bush, thorough brier, Over park, over pale, Thorough flood, thorough fire; I do wander everywhere, Swifter than the moon’s
sphere. And I serve the Fairy Queen, To dew her orbs upon the green. The cowslips tall her pensioners be; In their gold coats spots you see; Those be rubies,
fairy favors; In those freckles live their savors. I must go seek some dewdrops here And hang a pearl in every cowslip’s ear. Farewell, thou lob of
spirits. I’ll be gone. Our queen and all her elves come here anon.
ROBIN The King doth keep his revels here tonight. Take heed the Queen come not within his sight, For Oberon is passing fell and wrath Because that she, as her
attendant, hath A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king; She never had so sweet a changeling. And jealous Oberon would have the child Knight of his train, to
trace the forests wild. But she perforce withholds the lovèd boy, Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy. And now they never meet in grove or green,
By fountain clear or spangled starlight sheen, But they do square, that all their elves for fear Creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
FAIRY Either I mistake your shape and making quite, Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite Called Robin Goodfellow. Are not you he That frights the
maidens of the villagery, Skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern And bootless make the breathless huswife churn, And sometime make the drink to bear no
barm, Mislead night wanderers, laughing at their harm? Those that “Hobgoblin” call you and “sweet Puck,” You do their work, and they shall have good luck. Are
not you he? 
ROBIN  Thou speakest aright. I am that merry wanderer of the night. I jest to Oberon and make him smile When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, Neighing in
likeness of a filly foal. And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl In very likeness of a roasted crab, And, when she drinks, against her lips I bob And on her
withered dewlap pour the ale. The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale, Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me; Then slip I from her bum, down topples she
And “Tailor!” cries and falls into a cough, And then the whole choir hold their hips and loffe And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear A merrier hour was
never wasted there. But room, fairy. Here comes Oberon.
FAIRY And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!

Enter Oberon the King of Fairies at one door, with his train, and Titania the Queen at another, with hers.

OBERON Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.
TITANIA What, jealous Oberon? Fairies, skip hence. I have forsworn his bed and company.
OBERON Tarry, rash wanton. Am not I thy lord?
TITANIA Then I must be thy lady. But I know When thou hast stolen away from Fairyland And in the shape of Corin sat all day Playing on pipes of corn and versing
love To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here, Come from the farthest steep of India, But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon, Your buskined mistress and your
warrior love, To Theseus must be wedded, and you come To give their bed joy and prosperity?
OBERON How canst thou thus for shame, Titania, Glance at my credit with Hippolyta, Knowing I know thy love to Theseus? Didst not thou lead him through the
glimmering night From Perigouna, whom he ravishèd, And make him with fair Aegles break his faith, With Ariadne and Antiopa?
TITANIA These are the forgeries of jealousy; And never, since the middle summer’s spring, Met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, By pavèd fountain or by
rushy brook, Or in the beachèd margent of the sea, To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. Therefore the
winds, piping to us in vain, As in revenge have sucked up from the sea Contagious fogs, which, falling in the land, Hath every pelting river made so proud That
they have overborne their continents. The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain, The plowman lost his sweat, and the green corn Hath rotted ere his youth
attained a beard. The fold stands empty in the drownèd field, And crows are fatted with the murrain flock. The nine-men’s-morris is filled up with mud, And the
quaint mazes in the wanton green, For lack of tread, are undistinguishable. The human mortals want their winter here. No night is now with hymn or carol
blessed. Therefore the moon, the governess of floods, Pale in her anger, washes all the air, That rheumatic diseases do abound. And thorough this distemperature
we see The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, And on old Hiems’ thin and icy crown An odorous chaplet of sweet summer
buds Is, as in mockery, set. The spring, the summer, The childing autumn, angry winter, change Their wonted liveries, and the mazèd world By their increase now
knows not which is which. And this same progeny of evils comes From our debate, from our dissension; We are their parents and original.
OBERON  Do you amend it, then. It lies in you. Why should Titania cross her Oberon? I do but beg a little changeling boy To be my henchman.
TITANIA  Set your heart at rest: The Fairyland buys not the child of me. His mother was a vot’ress of my order, And in the spicèd Indian air by night Full often
hath she gossiped by my side And sat with me on Neptune’s yellow sands, Marking th’ embarkèd traders on the flood, When we have laughed to see the sails
conceive And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait, Following (her womb then rich with my young squire), Would
imitate and sail upon the land To fetch me trifles and return again, As from a voyage, rich with merchandise. But she, being mortal, of that boy did die, And
for her sake do I rear up her boy, And for her sake I will not part with him.
OBERON  How long within this wood intend you stay? TITANIA  Perchance till after Theseus’ wedding day. If you will patiently dance in our round And see our
moonlight revels, go with us. If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.
OBERON  Give me that boy and I will go with thee.
TITANIA  Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away. We shall chide downright if I longer stay. Titania and her fairies exit.
OBERON  Well, go thy way. Thou shalt not from this grove Till I torment thee for this injury.— My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememb’rest Since once I sat
upon a promontory And heard a mermaid on a dolphin’s back Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath That the rude sea grew civil at her song And certain stars
shot madly from their spheres To hear the sea-maid’s music.
ROBIN  I remember.
OBERON  That very time I saw (but thou couldst not), Flying between the cold moon and the Earth, Cupid all armed. A certain aim he took At a fair vestal thronèd
by the west, And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts. But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft Quenched in
the chaste beams of the wat’ry moon, And the imperial vot’ress passèd on In maiden meditation, fancy-free. Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell. It fell
upon a little western flower, Before, milk-white, now purple with love’s wound, And maidens call it “love-in-idleness.” Fetch me that flower; the herb I showed
thee once. The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid Will make or man or woman madly dote Upon the next live creature that it sees. Fetch me this herb, and be
thou here again Ere the leviathan can swim a league.
ROBIN  I’ll put a girdle round about the Earth In forty minutes.He exits. OBERON  Having once this juice, I’ll watch Titania when she is asleep And drop the
liquor of it in her eyes. The next thing then she, waking, looks upon (Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull, On meddling monkey, or on busy ape) She shall
pursue it with the soul of love. And ere I take this charm from off her sight (As I can take it with another herb), I’ll make her render up her page to me. But
who comes here? I am invisible, And I will overhear their conference.

Enter Demetrius, Helena following him.

DEMETRIUS  I love thee not; therefore pursue me not. Where is Lysander and fair Hermia? The one I’ll stay; the other stayeth me. Thou told’st me they were
stol’n unto this wood, And here am I, and wood within this wood Because I cannot meet my Hermia. Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
HELENA  You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant! But yet you draw not iron, for my heart Is true as steel. Leave you your power to draw, And I shall have no power
to follow you. 
DEMETRIUS  Do I entice you? Do I speak you fair? Or rather do I not in plainest truth Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you?
HELENA  And even for that do I love you the more. I am your spaniel, and, Demetrius, The more you beat me I will fawn on you. Use me but as your spaniel: spurn
me, strike me, Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave (Unworthy as I am) to follow you. What worser place can I beg in your love (And yet a place of high
respect with me) Than to be usèd as you use your dog?
DEMETRIUS  Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit, For I am sick when I do look on thee.
HELENA  And I am sick when I look not on you.
DEMETRIUS  You do impeach your modesty too much To leave the city and commit yourself Into the hands of one that loves you not, To trust the opportunity of
night And the ill counsel of a desert place With the rich worth of your virginity.
HELENA  Your virtue is my privilege. For that It is not night when I do see your face, Therefore I think I am not in the night. Nor doth this wood lack worlds
of company, For you, in my respect, are all the world. Then, how can it be said I am alone When all the world is here to look on me?
DEMETRIUS  I’ll run from thee and hide me in the brakes And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
HELENA  The wildest hath not such a heart as you. Run when you will. The story shall be changed: Apollo flies and Daphne holds the chase; The dove pursues the
griffin; the mild hind Makes speed to catch the tiger. Bootless speed When cowardice pursues and valor flies!
DEMETRIUS  I will not stay thy questions. Let me go, Or if thou follow me, do not believe But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.
HELENA  Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field, You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius! Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex. We cannot fight for love as men
may do. We should be wooed and were not made to woo. Demetrius exits. I’ll follow thee and make a heaven of hell To die upon the hand I love so well.Helena
exits. 
OBERON  Fare thee well, nymph. Ere he do leave this grove, Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy love.

Enter Robin.

Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.
ROBIN  Ay, there it is.
OBERON  I pray thee give it me. Robin gives him the flower. I know a bank where the wild thyme blows, Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows, Quite
overcanopied with luscious woodbine, With sweet muskroses, and with eglantine. There sleeps Titania sometime of the night, Lulled in these flowers with dances
and delight. And there the snake throws her enameled skin, Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. And with the juice of this I’ll streak her eyes And make her
full of hateful fantasies. Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove. He gives Robin part of the flower. A sweet Athenian lady is in love With a
disdainful youth. Anoint his eyes, But do it when the next thing he espies May be the lady. Thou shalt know the man By the Athenian garments he hath on. Effect
it with some care, that he may prove More fond on her than she upon her love. And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
ROBIN  Fear not, my lord. Your servant shall do so. They exit.


Scene wEnter Titania, Queen of Fairies, with her train.

TITANIA  Come, now a roundel and a fairy song; Then, for the third part of a minute, hence— Some to kill cankers in the muskrose buds, Some war with reremice
for their leathern wings To make my small elves coats, and some keep back The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders At our quaint spirits. Sing me now
asleep. Then to your offices and let me rest.She lies down.

Fairies sing.
FIRST FAIRY You spotted snakes with double tongue, Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen. Newts and blindworms, do no wrong, Come not near our Fairy Queen.
CHORUS Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Never harm Nor spell nor charm Come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night, with lullaby. 
FIRST FAIRY Weaving spiders, come not here. Hence, you long-legged spinners, hence. Beetles black, approach not near. Worm nor snail, do no offence.
CHORUS Philomel, with melody Sing in our sweet lullaby. Lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. Never harm Nor spell nor charm Come our lovely lady nigh.
So good night, with lullaby. Titania sleeps. 
SECOND FAIRY Hence, away! Now all is well. One aloof stand sentinel. Fairies exit.

Enter Oberon, who anoints Titania’s eyelids with the
nectar.

OBERON What thou seest when thou dost wake Do it for thy true love take. Love and languish for his sake. Be it ounce, or cat, or bear, Pard, or boar with
bristled hair, In thy eye that shall appear When thou wak’st, it is thy dear. Wake when some vile thing is near.He exits. 

Enter Lysander and Hermia.

LYSANDER Fair love, you faint with wand’ring in the wood. And, to speak troth, I have forgot our way. We’ll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good, And tarry for
the comfort of the day. 
HERMIA Be it so, Lysander. Find you out a bed, For I upon this bank will rest my head.
LYSANDER One turf shall serve as pillow for us both; One heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
HERMIA Nay, good Lysander. For my sake, my dear, Lie further off yet. Do not lie so near.
LYSANDER O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence! Love takes the meaning in love’s conference. I mean that my heart unto yours is knit, So that but one heart
we can make of it; Two bosoms interchainèd with an oath— So then two bosoms and a single troth. Then by your side no bed-room me deny, For lying so, Hermia, I
do not lie. 
HERMIA  Lysander riddles very prettily. Now much beshrew my manners and my pride If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied. But, gentle friend, for love and
courtesy, Lie further off in human modesty. Such separation, as may well be said, Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid. So far be distant; and good night,
sweet friend. Thy love ne’er alter till thy sweet life end!
LYSANDER  “Amen, amen” to that fair prayer, say I, And then end life when I end loyalty! Here is my bed. Sleep give thee all his rest!
HERMIA  With half that wish the wisher’s eyes be pressed! They sleep.

Enter Robin.

ROBIN   Through the forest have I gone,  But Athenian found I none  On whose eyes I might approve  This flower’s force in stirring love. He sees Lysander.
 Night and silence! Who is here?  Weeds of Athens he doth wear.  This is he my master said  Despisèd the Athenian maid.  And here the maiden, sleeping sound  On
 the dank and dirty ground.  Pretty soul, she durst not lie  Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.—  Churl, upon thy eyes I throw  All the power this charm
 doth owe. He anoints Lysander’s eyelids with the nectar.  When thou wak’st, let love forbid  Sleep his seat on thy eyelid.  So, awake when I am gone,  For I
 must now to Oberon.He exits. 
 
Enter Demetrius and Helena, running.

HELENA  Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.
DEMETRIUS  I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
HELENA  O, wilt thou darkling leave me? Do not so.
DEMETRIUS Stay, on thy peril. I alone will go.Demetrius exits.
HELENA  O, I am out of breath in this fond chase. The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. Happy is Hermia, wheresoe’er she lies, For she hath blessèd and
attractive eyes. How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears. If so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers. No, no, I am as ugly as a bear, For beasts that
meet me run away for fear. Therefore no marvel though Demetrius Do as a monster fly my presence thus. What wicked and dissembling glass of mine Made me compare
with Hermia’s sphery eyne? But who is here? Lysander, on the ground! Dead or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.— Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.
LYSANDER, waking up  And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake. Transparent Helena! Nature shows art, That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. Where
is Demetrius? O, how fit a word Is that vile name to perish on my sword!
HELENA  Do not say so. Lysander, say not so. What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though? Yet Hermia still loves you. Then be content.
LYSANDER  Content with Hermia? No, I do repent The tedious minutes I with her have spent. Not Hermia, but Helena I love. Who will not change a raven for a dove?
The will of man is by his reason swayed, And reason says you are the worthier maid. Things growing are not ripe until their season; So I, being young, till now
ripe not to reason. And touching now the point of human skill, Reason becomes the marshal to my will And leads me to your eyes, where I o’erlook Love’s stories
written in love’s richest book. 
HELENA  Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born? When at your hands did I deserve this scorn? Is ’t not enough, is ’t not enough, young man, That I did never,
no, nor never can Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius’ eye, But you must flout my insufficiency? Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do, In such
disdainful manner me to woo. But fare you well. Perforce I must confess I thought you lord of more true gentleness. O, that a lady of one man refused Should of
another therefore be abused!She exits. 
LYSANDER  She sees not Hermia.—Hermia, sleep thou there, And never mayst thou come Lysander near. For, as a surfeit of the sweetest things The deepest loathing
to the stomach brings, Or as the heresies that men do leave Are hated most of those they did deceive, So thou, my surfeit and my heresy, Of all be hated, but
the most of me! And, all my powers, address your love and might To honor Helen and to be her knight.He exits.
HERMIA, waking up  Help me, Lysander, help me! Do thy best To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast. Ay me, for pity! What a dream was here! Lysander, look
how I do quake with fear. Methought a serpent ate my heart away, And you sat smiling at his cruel prey. Lysander! What, removed? Lysander, lord! What, out of
hearing? Gone? No sound, no word? Alack, where are you? Speak, an if you hear. Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.— No? Then I well perceive you are
not nigh. Either death or you I’ll find immediately. She exits.



ACT e Scene qWith Titania still asleep onstage, enter the Clowns, Bottom, Quince, Snout, Starveling, Snug, and Flute.

BOTTOM  Are we all met?
QUINCE  Pat, pat. And here’s a marvels convenient place for our rehearsal. This green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn brake our tiring-house, and we will
do it in action as we will do it before the Duke.
BOTTOM  Peter Quince?
QUINCE  What sayest thou, bully Bottom?
BOTTOM  There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot
abide. How answer you that? SNOUT  By ’r lakin, a parlous fear.
STARVELING  I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
BOTTOM  Not a whit! I have a device to make all well. Write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords and that Pyramus
is not killed indeed. And, for the more better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus, but Bottom the weaver. This will put them out of fear.
QUINCE  Well, we will have such a prologue, and it shall be written in eight and six.
BOTTOM  No, make it two more. Let it be written in eight and eight.
SNOUT  Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
STARVELING  I fear it, I promise you.
BOTTOM  Masters, you ought to consider with yourself, to bring in (God shield us!) a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. For there is not a more fearful
wildfowl than your lion living, and we ought to look to ’t.
SNOUT  Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
BOTTOM  Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the lion’s neck, and he himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the same
defect: “Ladies,” or “Fair ladies, I would wish you,” or “I would request you,” or “I would entreat you not to fear, not to tremble! My life for yours. If you
think I come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. No, I am no such thing. I am a man as other men are.” And there indeed let him name his name and tell
them plainly he is Snug the joiner. 
QUINCE  Well, it shall be so. But there is two hard things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber, for you know Pyramus and Thisbe meet by moonlight.
SNOUT  Doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
BOTTOM  A calendar, a calendar! Look in the almanac. Find out moonshine, find out moonshine. Quince takes out a book.
QUINCE  Yes, it doth shine that night.
BOTTOM  Why, then, may you leave a casement of the great chamber window, where we play, open, and the moon may shine in at the casement.
QUINCE  Ay, or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern and say he comes to disfigure or to present the person of Moonshine. Then there is
another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber, for Pyramus and Thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a wall.
SNOUT  You can never bring in a wall. What say you, Bottom?
BOTTOM  Some man or other must present Wall. And let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some roughcast about him to signify wall, or let him hold his
fingers thus, and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.
QUINCE  If that may be, then all is well. Come, sit down, every mother’s son, and rehearse your parts. Pyramus, you begin. When you have spoken your speech,
enter into that brake, and so everyone according to his cue.

Enter Robin invisible to those onstage.

ROBIN, aside  What hempen homespuns have we swagg’ring here So near the cradle of the Fairy Queen? What, a play toward? I’ll be an auditor— An actor too
perhaps, if I see cause. 
QUINCE  Speak, Pyramus.—Thisbe, stand forth.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus   Thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet—
QUINCE  Odors, odors!
BOTTOM, as Pyramus   …odors savors sweet.  So hath thy breath, my dearest Thisbe dear.—  But hark, a voice! Stay thou but here awhile,  And by and by I will to
thee appear.He exits. 
ROBIN, aside  A stranger Pyramus than e’er played here.He exits.
FLUTE  Must I speak now?
QUINCE  Ay, marry, must you, for you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard and is to come again.
FLUTE, as Thisbe   Most radiant Pyramus, most lily-white of hue,  Of color like the red rose on triumphant brier,  Most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely Jew,
As true as truest horse, that yet would never tire.  I’ll meet thee, Pyramus, at Ninny’s tomb.
QUINCE  “Ninus’ tomb,” man! Why, you must not speak that yet. That you answer to Pyramus. You speak all your part at once, cues and all.—Pyramus, enter. Your
cue is past. It is “never tire.” 
FLUTE  O! As Thisbe. As true as truest horse, that yet would never  tire.

Enter Robin, and Bottom as Pyramus with the ass-head.

BOTTOM, as Pyramus   If I were fair, fair Thisbe, I were only thine. QUINCE  O monstrous! O strange! We are haunted. Pray, masters, fly, masters! Help! Quince,
Flute, Snout, Snug, and Starveling exit. 
ROBIN  I’ll follow you. I’ll lead you about a round,  Through bog, through bush, through brake,  through brier. Sometime a horse I’ll be, sometime a hound,  A
hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire, And neigh and bark and grunt and roar and burn, Like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn. He exits.
BOTTOM  Why do they run away? This is a knavery of them to make me afeard. Enter Snout.

SNOUT  O Bottom, thou art changed! What do I see on thee?
BOTTOM  What do you see? You see an ass-head of your own, do you?Snout exits.

Enter Quince.

QUINCE  Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! Thou art translated!He exits.
BOTTOM  I see their knavery. This is to make an ass of me, to fright me, if they could. But I will not stir from this place, do what they can. I will walk up
and down here, and I will sing, that they shall hear I am not afraid.  The ouzel cock, so black of hue,   With orange-tawny bill,  The throstle with his note so
true,   The wren with little quill—
TITANIA, waking up  What angel wakes me from my flow’ry bed?
BOTTOM sings   The finch, the sparrow, and the lark,   The plainsong cuckoo gray,  Whose note full many a man doth mark   And dares not answer “nay”— for,
indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? Who would give a bird the lie though he cry “cuckoo” never so?
TITANIA  I pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again. Mine ear is much enamored of thy note, So is mine eye enthrallèd to thy shape, And thy fair virtue’s force
perforce doth move me On the first view to say, to swear, I love thee. BOTTOM  Methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that. And yet, to say the
truth, reason and love keep little company together nowadays. The more the pity that some honest neighbors will not make them friends. Nay, I can gleek upon
occasion. 
TITANIA  Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful. BOTTOM  Not so neither; but if I had wit enough to get out of this wood, I have enough to serve mine own turn.
TITANIA  Out of this wood do not desire to go. Thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no. I am a spirit of no common rate. The summer still doth tend upon
my state, And I do love thee. Therefore go with me. I’ll give thee fairies to attend on thee, And they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep And sing while thou
on pressèd flowers dost sleep. And I will purge thy mortal grossness so That thou shalt like an airy spirit go.— Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Mote, and Mustardseed!

Enter four Fairies: Peaseblossom, Cobweb, Mote, and Mustardseed.

PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.
COBWEB  And I.
MOTE  And I.
MUSTARDSEED  And I.
ALL  Where shall we go?
TITANIA  Be kind and courteous to this gentleman. Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes; Feed him with apricocks and dewberries, With purple grapes, green
figs, and mulberries; The honey-bags steal from the humble-bees, And for night-tapers crop their waxen thighs And light them at the fiery glowworms’ eyes To
have my love to bed and to arise; And pluck the wings from painted butterflies To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes. Nod to him, elves, and do him
courtesies. 
PEASEBLOSSOM  Hail, mortal!
COBWEB  Hail!
MOTE  Hail!
MUSTARDSEED  Hail!
BOTTOM  I cry your Worships mercy, heartily.—I beseech your Worship’s name.
COBWEB  Cobweb.
BOTTOM  I shall desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Cobweb. If I cut my finger, I shall make bold with you.—Your name, honest gentleman?
PEASEBLOSSOM  Peaseblossom.
BOTTOM  I pray you, commend me to Mistress Squash, your mother, and to Master Peascod, your father. Good Master Peaseblossom, I shall desire you of more
acquaintance too.—Your name, I beseech you, sir?
MUSTARDSEED  Mustardseed.
BOTTOM  Good Master Mustardseed, I know your patience well. That same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. I promise you,
your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. I desire you of more acquaintance, good Master Mustardseed.
TITANIA  Come, wait upon him. Lead him to my bower.  The moon, methinks, looks with a wat’ry eye, And when she weeps, weeps every little flower,  Lamenting some
enforcèd chastity. Tie up my lover’s tongue. Bring him silently. They  exit.



Scene wEnter Oberon, King of Fairies.

OBERON  I wonder if Titania be awaked; Then what it was that next came in her eye, Which she must dote on in extremity.

Enter Robin Goodfellow.

Here comes my messenger. How now, mad spirit? What night-rule now about this haunted grove?
ROBIN  My mistress with a monster is in love. Near to her close and consecrated bower, While she was in her dull and sleeping hour, A crew of patches, rude
mechanicals, That work for bread upon Athenian stalls, Were met together to rehearse a play Intended for great Theseus’ nuptial day. The shallowest thick-skin
of that barren sort, Who Pyramus presented in their sport, Forsook his scene and entered in a brake. When I did him at this advantage take, An ass’s noll I
fixèd on his head. Anon his Thisbe must be answerèd, And forth my mimic comes. When they him spy, As wild geese that the creeping fowler eye, Or russet-pated
choughs, many in sort, Rising and cawing at the gun’s report, Sever themselves and madly sweep the sky, So at his sight away his fellows fly, And, at our stamp,
here o’er and o’er one falls. He “Murder” cries and help from Athens calls. Their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong, Made senseless things
begin to do them wrong; For briers and thorns at their apparel snatch, Some sleeves, some hats, from yielders all things catch. I led them on in this distracted
fear And left sweet Pyramus translated there. When in that moment, so it came to pass, Titania waked and straightway loved an ass.
OBERON  This falls out better than I could devise. But hast thou yet latched the Athenian’s eyes With the love juice, as I did bid thee do?
ROBIN  I took him sleeping—that is finished, too— And the Athenian woman by his side, That, when he waked, of force she must be eyed.

Enter Demetrius and Hermia.

OBERON  Stand close. This is the same Athenian.
ROBIN  This is the woman, but not this the man. They step aside.
DEMETRIUS  O, why rebuke you him that loves you so? Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe!
HERMIA  Now I but chide, but I should use thee worse, For thou, I fear, hast given me cause to curse. If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep, Being o’er shoes
in blood, plunge in the deep And kill me too. The sun was not so true unto the day As he to me. Would he have stolen away From sleeping Hermia? I’ll believe as
soon This whole Earth may be bored, and that the moon May through the center creep and so displease Her brother’s noontide with th’ Antipodes. It cannot be but
thou hast murdered him. So should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
DEMETRIUS  So should the murdered look, and so should I, Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty. Yet you, the murderer, look as bright, as clear, As
yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere. 
HERMIA  What’s this to my Lysander? Where is he? Ah, good Demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
DEMETRIUS  I had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
HERMIA  Out, dog! Out, cur! Thou driv’st me past the bounds Of maiden’s patience. Hast thou slain him, then? Henceforth be never numbered among men. O, once
tell true! Tell true, even for my sake! Durst thou have looked upon him, being awake? And hast thou killed him sleeping? O brave touch! Could not a worm, an
adder, do so much? An adder did it, for with doubler tongue Than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
DEMETRIUS  You spend your passion on a misprised mood. I am not guilty of Lysander’s blood, Nor is he dead, for aught that I can tell.
HERMIA  I pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
DEMETRIUS  An if I could, what should I get therefor?
HERMIA  A privilege never to see me more. And from thy hated presence part I so. See me no more, whether he be dead or no. She exits.
DEMETRIUS  There is no following her in this fierce vein. Here, therefore, for a while I will remain. So sorrow’s heaviness doth heavier grow For debt that
bankrout sleep doth sorrow owe, Which now in some slight measure it will pay, If for his tender here I make some stay. He lies down and falls asleep.
OBERON, to Robin  What hast thou done? Thou hast mistaken quite And laid the love juice on some true-love’s sight. Of thy misprision must perforce ensue Some
true-love turned, and not a false turned true. 
ROBIN  Then fate o’errules, that, one man holding troth, A million fail, confounding oath on oath.
OBERON  About the wood go swifter than the wind, And Helena of Athens look thou find. All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer With sighs of love that costs the
fresh blood dear. By some illusion see thou bring her here. I’ll charm his eyes against she do appear.
ROBIN  I go, I go, look how I go, Swifter than arrow from the Tartar’s bow.He exits.
OBERON, applying the nectar to Demetrius’ eyes   Flower of this purple dye,  Hit with Cupid’s archery,  Sink in apple of his eye.  When his love he doth espy,
Let her shine as gloriously  As the Venus of the sky.—  When thou wak’st, if she be by,  Beg of her for remedy.

Enter Robin.

ROBIN   Captain of our fairy band,  Helena is here at hand,  And the youth, mistook by me,  Pleading for a lover’s fee.  Shall we their fond pageant see?  Lord,
what fools these mortals be! 
OBERON   Stand aside. The noise they make  Will cause Demetrius to awake.
ROBIN   Then will two at once woo one.  That must needs be sport alone.  And those things do best please me  That befall prepost’rously. They step aside.

Enter Lysander and Helena.

LYSANDER  Why should you think that I should woo in scorn?  Scorn and derision never come in tears. Look when I vow, I weep; and vows so born,  In their
nativity all truth appears. How can these things in me seem scorn to you, Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?
HELENA  You do advance your cunning more and more.  When truth kills truth, O devilish holy fray! These vows are Hermia’s. Will you give her o’er?  Weigh oath
with oath and you will nothing  weigh. Your vows to her and me, put in two scales, Will even weigh, and both as light as tales.
LYSANDER  I had no judgment when to her I swore.
HELENA  Nor none, in my mind, now you give her o’er.
LYSANDER  Demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
DEMETRIUS, waking up  O Helen, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine! To what, my love, shall I compare thine eyne? Crystal is muddy. O, how ripe in show Thy lips,
those kissing cherries, tempting grow! That pure congealèd white, high Taurus’ snow, Fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow When thou hold’st up thy
hand. O, let me kiss This princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
HELENA  O spite! O hell! I see you all are bent To set against me for your merriment. If you were civil and knew courtesy, You would not do me thus much
injury. Can you not hate me, as I know you do, But you must join in souls to mock me too? If you were men, as men you are in show, You would not use a gentle
lady so, To vow and swear and superpraise my parts, When, I am sure, you hate me with your hearts. You both are rivals and love Hermia, And now both rivals to
mock Helena. A trim exploit, a manly enterprise, To conjure tears up in a poor maid’s eyes With your derision! None of noble sort Would so offend a virgin and
extort A poor soul’s patience, all to make you sport.
LYSANDER  You are unkind, Demetrius. Be not so, For you love Hermia; this you know I know. And here with all goodwill, with all my heart, In Hermia’s love I
yield you up my part. And yours of Helena to me bequeath, Whom I do love and will do till my death.
HELENA  Never did mockers waste more idle breath.
DEMETRIUS  Lysander, keep thy Hermia. I will none. If e’er I loved her, all that love is gone. My heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned, And now to Helen is
it home returned, There to remain.
LYSANDER  Helen, it is not so.
DEMETRIUS  Disparage not the faith thou dost not know, Lest to thy peril thou aby it dear. Look where thy love comes. Yonder is thy dear.

Enter Hermia.

HERMIA, to Lysander  Dark night, that from the eye his function takes, The ear more quick of apprehension makes; Wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, It
pays the hearing double recompense. Thou art not by mine eye, Lysander, found; Mine ear, I thank it, brought me to thy sound. But why unkindly didst thou leave
me so? 
LYSANDER  Why should he stay whom love doth press to go?
HERMIA  What love could press Lysander from my side?
LYSANDER  Lysander’s love, that would not let him bide, Fair Helena, who more engilds the night Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. Why seek’st thou me?
Could not this make thee know The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so?
HERMIA  You speak not as you think. It cannot be.
HELENA  Lo, she is one of this confederacy! Now I perceive they have conjoined all three To fashion this false sport in spite of me.— Injurious Hermia, most
ungrateful maid, Have you conspired, have you with these contrived, To bait me with this foul derision? Is all the counsel that we two have shared, The sisters’
vows, the hours that we have spent When we have chid the hasty-footed time For parting us—O, is all forgot? All schooldays’ friendship, childhood innocence? We,
Hermia, like two artificial gods, Have with our needles created both one flower, Both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion, Both warbling of one song, both in
one key, As if our hands, our sides, voices, and minds Had been incorporate. So we grew together Like to a double cherry, seeming parted, But yet an union in
partition, Two lovely berries molded on one stem; So with two seeming bodies but one heart, Two of the first, like coats in heraldry, Due but to one, and
crownèd with one crest. And will you rent our ancient love asunder, To join with men in scorning your poor friend? It is not friendly; ’tis not maidenly. Our
sex, as well as I, may chide you for it, Though I alone do feel the injury.
HERMIA  I am amazèd at your words. I scorn you not. It seems that you scorn me.
HELENA  Have you not set Lysander, as in scorn, To follow me and praise my eyes and face, And made your other love, Demetrius, Who even but now did spurn me
with his foot, To call me goddess, nymph, divine and rare, Precious, celestial? Wherefore speaks he this To her he hates? And wherefore doth Lysander Deny your
love (so rich within his soul) And tender me, forsooth, affection, But by your setting on, by your consent? What though I be not so in grace as you, So hung
upon with love, so fortunate, But miserable most, to love unloved? This you should pity rather than despise.
HERMIA  I understand not what you mean by this.
HELENA  Ay, do. Persever, counterfeit sad looks, Make mouths upon me when I turn my back, Wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up. This sport, well carried,
shall be chronicled. If you have any pity, grace, or manners, You would not make me such an argument. But fare you well. ’Tis partly my own fault, Which death
or absence soon shall remedy. 
LYSANDER  Stay, gentle Helena. Hear my excuse, My love, my life, my soul, fair Helena.
HELENA  O excellent!
HERMIA, to Lysander  Sweet, do not scorn her so.
DEMETRIUS, to Lysander  If she cannot entreat, I can compel.
LYSANDER  Thou canst compel no more than she entreat. Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers.— Helen, I love thee. By my life, I do. I swear by
that which I will lose for thee, To prove him false that says I love thee not.
DEMETRIUS  I say I love thee more than he can do.
LYSANDER  If thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.
DEMETRIUS  Quick, come.
HERMIA  Lysander, whereto tends all this? She takes hold of Lysander.
LYSANDER  Away, you Ethiop!
DEMETRIUS, to Hermia  No, no. He’ll Seem to break loose. To Lysander. Take on as you would follow, But yet come not. You are a tame man, go! LYSANDER, to Hermia
Hang off, thou cat, thou burr! Vile thing, let loose, Or I will shake thee from me like a serpent.
HERMIA  Why are you grown so rude? What change is this, Sweet love?
LYSANDER  Thy love? Out, tawny Tartar, out! Out, loathèd med’cine! O, hated potion, hence!
HERMIA  Do you not jest?
HELENA  Yes, sooth, and so do you.
LYSANDER  Demetrius, I will keep my word with thee.
DEMETRIUS  I would I had your bond. For I perceive A weak bond holds you. I’ll not trust your word.
LYSANDER  What? Should I hurt her, strike her, kill her dead? Although I hate her, I’ll not harm her so.
HERMIA  What, can you do me greater harm than hate? Hate me? Wherefore? O me, what news, my love? Am not I Hermia? Are not you Lysander? I am as fair now as I
was erewhile. Since night you loved me; yet since night you left me. Why, then, you left me—O, the gods forbid!— In earnest, shall I say?
LYSANDER  Ay, by my life, And never did desire to see thee more. Therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt. Be certain, nothing truer, ’tis no jest That I
do hate thee and love Helena. Hermia turns him loose.
HERMIA  O me! To Helena. You juggler, you cankerblossom, You thief of love! What, have you come by night And stol’n my love’s heart from him?
HELENA  Fine, i’ faith. Have you no modesty, no maiden shame, No touch of bashfulness? What, will you tear Impatient answers from my gentle tongue? Fie, fie,
you counterfeit, you puppet, you! 
HERMIA  “Puppet”? Why so? Ay, that way goes the game. Now I perceive that she hath made compare Between our statures; she hath urged her height, And with her
personage, her tall personage, Her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him. And are you grown so high in his esteem Because I am so dwarfish and so low?
How low am I, thou painted maypole? Speak! How low am I? I am not yet so low But that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
HELENA  I pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen, Let her not hurt me. I was never curst; I have no gift at all in shrewishness. I am a right maid for my
cowardice. Let her not strike me. You perhaps may think, Because she is something lower than myself, That I can match her.
HERMIA  “Lower”? Hark, again!
HELENA  Good Hermia, do not be so bitter with me. I evermore did love you, Hermia, Did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you— Save that, in love unto
Demetrius, I told him of your stealth unto this wood. He followed you; for love, I followed him. But he hath chid me hence and threatened me To strike me, spurn
me, nay, to kill me too. And now, so you will let me quiet go, To Athens will I bear my folly back And follow you no further. Let me go. You see how simple and
how fond I am. 
HERMIA  Why, get you gone. Who is ’t that hinders you?
HELENA  A foolish heart that I leave here behind.
HERMIA  What, with Lysander?
HELENA  With Demetrius.
LYSANDER  Be not afraid. She shall not harm thee, Helena.
DEMETRIUS  No, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
HELENA  O, when she is angry, she is keen and shrewd. She was a vixen when she went to school, And though she be but little, she is fierce.
HERMIA  “Little” again? Nothing but “low” and “little”? Why will you suffer her to flout me thus? Let me come to her.
LYSANDER  Get you gone, you dwarf, You minimus of hind’ring knotgrass made, You bead, you acorn—
DEMETRIUS  You are too officious In her behalf that scorns your services. Let her alone. Speak not of Helena. Take not her part. For if thou dost intend Never
so little show of love to her, Thou shalt aby it.
LYSANDER  Now she holds me not. Now follow, if thou dar’st, to try whose right, Of thine or mine, is most in Helena.
DEMETRIUS  “Follow”? Nay, I’ll go with thee, cheek by jowl. Demetrius and Lysander exit.
HERMIA  You, mistress, all this coil is long of you. Helena retreats. Nay, go not back.
HELENA  I will not trust you, I, Nor longer stay in your curst company. Your hands than mine are quicker for a fray. My legs are longer though, to run away.She
exits. 
HERMIA  I am amazed and know not what to say.She exits.
OBERON, to Robin  This is thy negligence. Still thou mistak’st, Or else committ’st thy knaveries willfully.
ROBIN  Believe me, king of shadows, I mistook. Did not you tell me I should know the man By the Athenian garments he had on? And so far blameless proves my
enterprise That I have ’nointed an Athenian’s eyes; And so far am I glad it so did sort, As this their jangling I esteem a sport.
OBERON  Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight. Hie, therefore, Robin, overcast the night; The starry welkin cover thou anon With drooping fog as black
as Acheron, And lead these testy rivals so astray As one come not within another’s way. Like to Lysander sometime frame thy tongue; Then stir Demetrius up with
bitter wrong. And sometime rail thou like Demetrius. And from each other look thou lead them thus, Till o’er their brows death-counterfeiting sleep With leaden
legs and batty wings doth creep. Then crush this herb into Lysander’s eye, He gives a flower to Robin. Whose liquor hath this virtuous property, To take from
thence all error with his might And make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. When they next wake, all this derision Shall seem a dream and fruitless
vision. And back to Athens shall the lovers wend, With league whose date till death shall never end. Whiles I in this affair do thee employ, I’ll to my queen
and beg her Indian boy; And then I will her charmèd eye release From monster’s view, and all things shall be peace.
ROBIN  My fairy lord, this must be done with haste, For night’s swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, And yonder shines Aurora’s harbinger, At whose approach,
ghosts wand’ring here and there Troop home to churchyards. Damnèd spirits all, That in crossways and floods have burial, Already to their wormy beds are
gone. For fear lest day should look their shames upon, They willfully themselves exile from light And must for aye consort with black-browed night.
OBERON  But we are spirits of another sort. I with the Morning’s love have oft made sport And, like a forester, the groves may tread Even till the eastern gate,
all fiery red, Opening on Neptune with fair blessèd beams, Turns into yellow gold his salt-green streams. But notwithstanding, haste! Make no delay. We may
effect this business yet ere day.He exits. 
ROBIN   Up and down, up and down,  I will lead them up and down.  I am feared in field and town.  Goblin, lead them up and down. Here comes one.

Enter Lysander.

LYSANDER  Where art thou, proud Demetrius? Speak thou now. ROBIN, in Demetrius’ voice  Here, villain, drawn and ready. Where art thou?
LYSANDER  I will be with thee straight. ROBIN, in Demetrius’ voice  Follow me, then, to plainer ground.Lysander exits.

Enter Demetrius.

DEMETRIUS  Lysander, speak again. Thou runaway, thou coward, art thou fled? Speak! In some bush? Where dost thou hide thy head?
ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice  Thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars, Telling the bushes that thou look’st for wars, And wilt not come? Come, recreant! Come,
thou child! I’ll whip thee with a rod. He is defiled That draws a sword on thee.
DEMETRIUS  Yea, art thou there?
ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice  Follow my voice. We’ll try no manhood here. They exit.

Enter Lysander.

LYSANDER  He goes before me and still dares me on. When I come where he calls, then he is gone. The villain is much lighter-heeled than I. I followed fast, but
faster he did fly, That fallen am I in dark uneven way, And here will rest me. Come, thou gentle day, For if but once thou show me thy gray light, I’ll find
Demetrius and revenge this spite. He lies down and sleeps.

Enter Robin and Demetrius.

ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice  Ho, ho, ho! Coward, why com’st thou not?
DEMETRIUS  Abide me, if thou dar’st, for well I wot Thou runn’st before me, shifting every place, And dar’st not stand nor look me in the face. Where art thou
now? 
ROBIN, in Lysander’s voice  Come hither. I am here.
DEMETRIUS  Nay, then, thou mock’st me. Thou shalt buy this dear If ever I thy face by daylight see. Now go thy way. Faintness constraineth me To measure out my
length on this cold bed. By day’s approach look to be visited. He lies down and sleeps.

Enter Helena.

HELENA  O weary night, O long and tedious night,  Abate thy hours! Shine, comforts, from the east, That I may back to Athens by daylight  From these that my
poor company detest. And sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow’s eye, Steal me awhile from mine own company. She lies down and sleeps.
ROBIN   Yet but three? Come one more.  Two of both kinds makes up four.  Here she comes, curst and sad.  Cupid is a knavish lad  Thus to make poor females mad.

Enter Hermia.

HERMIA  Never so weary, never so in woe,  Bedabbled with the dew and torn with briers, I can no further crawl, no further go.  My legs can keep no pace with my
desires. Here will I rest me till the break of day. Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray! She lies down and sleeps.
ROBIN     On the ground    Sleep sound.    I’ll apply    To your eye,  Gentle lover, remedy. Robin applies the nectar   to Lysander’s eyes.    When thou wak’st,
Thou tak’st    True delight    In the sight  Of thy former lady’s eye.  And the country proverb known,  That every man should take his own,  In your waking
shall be shown.  Jack shall have Jill;  Naught shall go ill;  The man shall have his mare again, and all shall be  well. He exits.




ACT r Scene qWith the four lovers still asleep onstage, enter Titania, Queen of Fairies, and Bottom and Fairies, and Oberon, the King, behind them unseen by
those onstage.

TITANIA  Come, sit thee down upon this flow’ry bed,  While I thy amiable cheeks do coy, And stick muskroses in thy sleek smooth head,  And kiss thy fair large
ears, my gentle joy. 
BOTTOM  Where’s Peaseblossom?
PEASEBLOSSOM  Ready.
BOTTOM  Scratch my head, Peaseblossom. Where’s Monsieur Cobweb?
COBWEB  Ready.
BOTTOM  Monsieur Cobweb, good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle, and, good monsieur, bring
me the honey-bag. Do not fret yourself too much in the action, monsieur, and, good monsieur, have a care the honey-bag break not; I would be loath to have you
overflown with a honey-bag, signior. Cobweb exits. Where’s Monsieur Mustardseed?
MUSTARDSEED  Ready.
BOTTOM  Give me your neaf, Monsieur Mustardseed. Pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.
MUSTARDSEED  What’s your will?
BOTTOM  Nothing, good monsieur, but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch. I must to the barber’s, monsieur, for methinks I am marvels hairy about the face. And I
am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, I must scratch.
TITANIA  What, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
BOTTOM  I have a reasonable good ear in music. Let’s have the tongs and the bones.
TITANIA  Or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
BOTTOM  Truly, a peck of provender. I could munch your good dry oats. Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay. Good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.
TITANIA  I have a venturous fairy that shall seek The squirrel’s hoard and fetch thee new nuts.
BOTTOM  I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. But, I pray you, let none of your people stir me; I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.
TITANIA  Sleep thou, and I will wind thee in my arms.— Fairies, begone, and be all ways away. Fairies exit. So doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle Gently
entwist; the female ivy so Enrings the barky fingers of the elm. O, how I love thee! How I dote on thee! Bottom and Titania sleep.

Enter Robin Goodfellow.

OBERON  Welcome, good Robin. Seest thou this sweet sight? Her dotage now I do begin to pity. For, meeting her of late behind the wood, Seeking sweet favors for
this hateful fool, I did upbraid her and fall out with her. For she his hairy temples then had rounded With coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers; And that same
dew, which sometime on the buds Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, Stood now within the pretty flouriets’ eyes, Like tears that did their own
disgrace bewail. When I had at my pleasure taunted her, And she in mild terms begged my patience, I then did ask of her her changeling child, Which straight she
gave me, and her fairy sent To bear him to my bower in Fairyland. And now I have the boy, I will undo This hateful imperfection of her eyes. And, gentle Puck,
take this transformèd scalp From off the head of this Athenian swain, That he, awaking when the other do, May all to Athens back again repair And think no more
of this night’s accidents But as the fierce vexation of a dream. But first I will release the Fairy Queen. He applies the nectar to her eyes.  Be as thou wast
wont to be.  See as thou wast wont to see.  Dian’s bud o’er Cupid’s flower  Hath such force and blessèd power. Now, my Titania, wake you, my sweet queen.
TITANIA, waking  My Oberon, what visions have I seen! Methought I was enamored of an ass.
OBERON  There lies your love.
TITANIA  How came these things to pass? O, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
OBERON  Silence awhile.—Robin, take off this head.— Titania, music call; and strike more dead Than common sleep of all these five the sense.
TITANIA  Music, ho, music such as charmeth sleep!
ROBIN, removing the ass-head from Bottom  Now, when thou wak’st, with thine own fool’s eyes peep.
OBERON  Sound music.Music. Come, my queen, take hands with me, And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be. Titania and Oberon dance. Now thou and I are new
in amity, And will tomorrow midnight solemnly Dance in Duke Theseus’ house triumphantly, And bless it to all fair prosperity. There shall the pairs of faithful
lovers be Wedded, with Theseus, all in jollity.
ROBIN   Fairy king, attend and mark.  I do hear the morning lark.
OBERON   Then, my queen, in silence sad  Trip we after night’s shade.  We the globe can compass soon,  Swifter than the wand’ring moon.
TITANIA   Come, my lord, and in our flight  Tell me how it came this night  That I sleeping here was found  With these mortals on the ground.
Oberon, Robin, and Titania exit.

Wind horn. Enter Theseus and all his train, Hippolyta, Egeus.

THESEUS  Go, one of you, find out the Forester. For now our observation is performed, And, since we have the vaward of the day, My love shall hear the music of
my hounds. Uncouple in the western valley; let them go. Dispatch, I say, and find the Forester. A Servant exits. We will, fair queen, up to the mountain’s top
And mark the musical confusion Of hounds and echo in conjunction.
HIPPOLYTA  I was with Hercules and Cadmus once, When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear With hounds of Sparta. Never did I hear Such gallant chiding, for,
besides the groves, The skies, the fountains, every region near Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard So musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
THESEUS  My hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind, So flewed, so sanded; and their heads are hung With ears that sweep away the morning dew; Crook-kneed, and
dewlapped like Thessalian bulls; Slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells, Each under each. A cry more tunable Was never holloed to, nor cheered with
horn, In Crete, in Sparta, nor in Thessaly. Judge when you hear.—But soft! What nymphs are these?
EGEUS  My lord, this is my daughter here asleep, And this Lysander; this Demetrius is, This Helena, old Nedar’s Helena. I wonder of their being here together.
THESEUS  No doubt they rose up early to observe The rite of May, and hearing our intent, Came here in grace of our solemnity. But speak, Egeus. Is not this the
day That Hermia should give answer of her choice?
EGEUS  It is, my lord.
THESEUS  Go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns. A Servant exits. Shout within. Wind horns. They all start up.
THESEUS  Good morrow, friends. Saint Valentine is past. Begin these woodbirds but to couple now? Demetrius, Helena, Hermia, and Lysander kneel.
LYSANDER  Pardon, my lord. THESEUS  I pray you all, stand up. They rise. I know you two are rival enemies. How comes this gentle concord in the world, That
hatred is so far from jealousy To sleep by hate and fear no enmity?
LYSANDER  My lord, I shall reply amazèdly, Half sleep, half waking. But as yet, I swear, I cannot truly say how I came here. But, as I think—for truly would I
speak, And now I do bethink me, so it is: I came with Hermia hither. Our intent Was to be gone from Athens, where we might, Without the peril of the Athenian
law— 
EGEUS  Enough, enough!—My lord, you have enough. I beg the law, the law upon his head. They would have stol’n away.—They would, Demetrius, Thereby to have
defeated you and me: You of your wife and me of my consent, Of my consent that she should be your wife.
DEMETRIUS  My lord, fair Helen told me of their stealth, Of this their purpose hither to this wood, And I in fury hither followed them, Fair Helena in fancy
following me. But, my good lord, I wot not by what power (But by some power it is) my love to Hermia, Melted as the snow, seems to me now As the remembrance of
an idle gaud Which in my childhood I did dote upon, And all the faith, the virtue of my heart, The object and the pleasure of mine eye, Is only Helena. To her,
my lord, Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia. But like a sickness did I loathe this food. But, as in health, come to my natural taste, Now I do wish it, love it,
long for it, And will forevermore be true to it.
THESEUS  Fair lovers, you are fortunately met. Of this discourse we more will hear anon.— Egeus, I will overbear your will, For in the temple by and by, with
us, These couples shall eternally be knit.— And, for the morning now is something worn, Our purposed hunting shall be set aside. Away with us to Athens. Three
and three, We’ll hold a feast in great solemnity. Come, Hippolyta. Theseus and his train, including Hippolyta and Egeus, exit.
DEMETRIUS  These things seem small and undistinguishable, Like far-off mountains turnèd into clouds.
HERMIA  Methinks I see these things with parted eye, When everything seems double.
HELENA  So methinks. And I have found Demetrius like a jewel, Mine own and not mine own.
DEMETRIUS  Are you sure That we are awake? It seems to me That yet we sleep, we dream. Do not you think The Duke was here and bid us follow him?
HERMIA  Yea, and my father.
HELENA  And Hippolyta.
LYSANDER  And he did bid us follow to the temple.
DEMETRIUS  Why, then, we are awake. Let’s follow him, And by the way let us recount our dreams. Lovers exit. BOTTOM, waking up   When my cue comes, call me, and
I will answer. My next is “Most fair Pyramus.” Hey-ho! Peter Quince! Flute the bellows-mender! Snout the tinker! Starveling! God’s my life! Stolen hence and
left me asleep! I have had a most rare vision. I have had a dream past the wit of man to say what dream it was. Man is but an ass if he go about to expound this
dream. Methought I was—there is no man can tell what. Methought I was and methought I had—but man is but a patched fool if he will offer to say what methought I
had. The eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man’s hand is not able to taste, his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream
was. I will get Peter Quince to write a ballad of this dream. It shall be called “Bottom’s Dream” because it hath no bottom; and I will sing it in the latter
end of a play, before the Duke. Peradventure, to make it the more gracious, I shall sing it at her death. He exits.



Scene wEnter Quince, Flute, Snout, and Starveling.

QUINCE  Have you sent to Bottom’s house? Is he come home yet?
STARVELING  He cannot be heard of. Out of doubt he is transported.
FLUTE  If he come not, then the play is marred. It goes not forward, doth it?
QUINCE  It is not possible. You have not a man in all Athens able to discharge Pyramus but he.
FLUTE  No, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraftman in Athens.
QUINCE  Yea, and the best person too, and he is a very paramour for a sweet voice.
FLUTE  You must say “paragon.” A “paramour” is (God bless us) a thing of naught.

Enter Snug the joiner.

SNUG  Masters, the Duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three lords and ladies more married. If our sport had gone forward, we had all been made
men. 
FLUTE  O, sweet bully Bottom! Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life. He could not have ’scaped sixpence a day. An the Duke had not given him sixpence
a day for playing Pyramus, I’ll be hanged. He would have deserved it. Sixpence a day in Pyramus, or nothing!

Enter Bottom.

BOTTOM  Where are these lads? Where are these hearts?
QUINCE  Bottom! O most courageous day! O most happy hour!
BOTTOM  Masters, I am to discourse wonders. But ask me not what; for, if I tell you, I am not true Athenian. I will tell you everything right as it fell out.
QUINCE  Let us hear, sweet Bottom.
BOTTOM  Not a word of me. All that I will tell you is that the Duke hath dined. Get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your
pumps. Meet presently at the palace. Every man look o’er his part. For the short and the long is, our play is preferred. In any case, let Thisbe have clean
linen, and let not him that plays the lion pare his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion’s claws. And, most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for we
are to utter sweet breath, and I do not doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy. No more words. Away! Go, away! They exit.




ACT t
Scene qEnter Theseus, Hippolyta, and Philostrate, Lords, and
Attendants.

HIPPOLYTA  ’Tis strange, my Theseus, that these lovers speak of.
THESEUS  More strange than true. I never may believe These antique fables nor these fairy toys. Lovers and madmen have such seething brains, Such shaping
fantasies, that apprehend More than cool reason ever comprehends. The lunatic, the lover, and the poet Are of imagination all compact. One sees more devils than
vast hell can hold: That is the madman. The lover, all as frantic, Sees Helen’s beauty in a brow of Egypt. The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling, Doth glance
from heaven to Earth, from Earth to heaven, And as imagination bodies forth The forms of things unknown, the poet’s pen Turns them to shapes and gives to airy
nothing A local habitation and a name. Such tricks hath strong imagination That, if it would but apprehend some joy, It comprehends some bringer of that joy. Or
in the night, imagining some fear, How easy is a bush supposed a bear!
HIPPOLYTA  But all the story of the night told over, And all their minds transfigured so together, More witnesseth than fancy’s images And grows to something of
great constancy, But, howsoever, strange and admirable.

Enter Lovers: Lysander, Demetrius, Hermia, and Helena.

THESEUS  Here come the lovers full of joy and mirth.— Joy, gentle friends! Joy and fresh days of love Accompany your hearts!
LYSANDER  More than to us Wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
THESEUS  Come now, what masques, what dances shall we have To wear away this long age of three hours Between our after-supper and bedtime? Where is our usual
manager of mirth? What revels are in hand? Is there no play To ease the anguish of a torturing hour? Call Philostrate.
PHILOSTRATE, coming forward  Here, mighty Theseus.
THESEUS  Say what abridgment have you for this evening, What masque, what music? How shall we beguile The lazy time if not with some delight?
PHILOSTRATE, giving Theseus a paper  There is a brief how many sports are ripe. Make choice of which your Highness will see first.
THESEUS  “The battle with the Centaurs, to be sung By an Athenian eunuch to the harp.” We’ll none of that. That have I told my love In glory of my kinsman
Hercules. “The riot of the tipsy Bacchanals, Tearing the Thracian singer in their rage.” That is an old device, and it was played When I from Thebes came last a
conqueror. “The thrice-three Muses mourning for the death Of learning, late deceased in beggary.” That is some satire, keen and critical, Not sorting with a
nuptial ceremony. “A tedious brief scene of young Pyramus And his love Thisbe, very tragical mirth.” “Merry” and “tragical”? “Tedious” and “brief”? That is hot
ice and wondrous strange snow! How shall we find the concord of this discord?
PHILOSTRATE  A play there is, my lord, some ten words long (Which is as brief as I have known a play), But by ten words, my lord, it is too long, Which makes it
tedious; for in all the play, There is not one word apt, one player fitted. And tragical, my noble lord, it is. For Pyramus therein doth kill himself, Which,
when I saw rehearsed, I must confess, Made mine eyes water; but more merry tears The passion of loud laughter never shed.
THESEUS  What are they that do play it?
PHILOSTRATE  Hard-handed men that work in Athens here, Which never labored in their minds till now, And now have toiled their unbreathed memories With this same
play, against your nuptial. 
THESEUS  And we will hear it.
PHILOSTRATE  No, my noble lord, It is not for you. I have heard it over, And it is nothing, nothing in the world, Unless you can find sport in their intents,
Extremely stretched and conned with cruel pain To do you service.
THESEUS  I will hear that play, For never anything can be amiss When simpleness and duty tender it. Go, bring them in—and take your places, ladies. Philostrate exits.
HIPPOLYTA  I love not to see wretchedness o’ercharged, And duty in his service perishing.
THESEUS  Why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
HIPPOLYTA  He says they can do nothing in this kind.
THESEUS  The kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing. Our sport shall be to take what they mistake; And what poor duty cannot do, noble respect Takes it in
might, not merit. Where I have come, great clerks have purposèd To greet me with premeditated welcomes, Where I have seen them shiver and look pale, Make
periods in the midst of sentences, Throttle their practiced accent in their fears, And in conclusion dumbly have broke off, Not paying me a welcome. Trust me,
sweet, Out of this silence yet I picked a welcome, And in the modesty of fearful duty, I read as much as from the rattling tongue Of saucy and audacious
eloquence. Love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity In least speak most, to my capacity.

Enter Philostrate.

PHILOSTRATE  So please your Grace, the Prologue is addressed.
THESEUS  Let him approach.

Enter the Prologue.

PROLOGUE  If we offend, it is with our goodwill.  That you should think we come not to offend, But with goodwill. To show our simple skill,  That is the true
 beginning of our end. Consider, then, we come but in despite.  We do not come, as minding to content you, Our true intent is. All for your delight  We are not
 here. That you should here repent  you, The actors are at hand, and, by their show, You shall know all that you are like to know. Prologue exits.
THESEUS  This fellow doth not stand upon points.
LYSANDER  He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt; he knows not the stop. A good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.
HIPPOLYTA  Indeed he hath played on this prologue like a child on a recorder—a sound, but not in government.
THESEUS  His speech was like a tangled chain—nothing impaired, but all disordered. Who is next?

Enter Pyramus (Bottom), and Thisbe (Flute), and Wall (Snout), and Moonshine (Starveling), and Lion (Snug), and Prologue (Quince).

QUINCE, as Prologue  Gentles, perchance you wonder at this show.  But wonder on, till truth make all things plain. This man is Pyramus, if you would know.  This
 beauteous lady Thisbe is certain. This man with lime and roughcast doth present  “Wall,” that vile wall which did these lovers  sunder; And through Wall’s
 chink, poor souls, they are content  To whisper, at the which let no man wonder. This man, with lantern, dog, and bush of thorn,  Presenteth “Moonshine,” for,
 if you will know, By moonshine did these lovers think no scorn  To meet at Ninus’ tomb, there, there to woo. This grisly beast (which “Lion” hight by name)
 The trusty Thisbe coming first by night Did scare away or rather did affright; And, as she fled, her mantle she did fall,  Which Lion vile with bloody mouth
 did stain. Anon comes Pyramus, sweet youth and tall,  And finds his trusty Thisbe’s mantle slain. Whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade,  He bravely
 broached his boiling bloody breast. And Thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade,  His dagger drew, and died. For all the rest, Let Lion, Moonshine, Wall, and lovers
 twain At large discourse, while here they do remain.
THESEUS  I wonder if the lion be to speak.
DEMETRIUS  No wonder, my lord. One lion may when many asses do. Lion, Thisbe, Moonshine, and Prologue exit. SNOUT, as Wall  In this same interlude it doth
 befall That I, one Snout by name, present a wall; And such a wall as I would have you think That had in it a crannied hole or chink, Through which the lovers,
 Pyramus and Thisbe, Did whisper often, very secretly. This loam, this roughcast, and this stone doth show That I am that same wall. The truth is so. And this
 the cranny is, right and sinister, Through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
THESEUS  Would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
DEMETRIUS  It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse, my lord.
THESEUS  Pyramus draws near the wall. Silence.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus  O grim-looked night! O night with hue so black!  O night, which ever art when day is not! O night! O night! Alack, alack, alack!  I fear my
 Thisbe’s promise is forgot. And thou, O wall, O sweet, O lovely wall,  That stand’st between her father’s ground and  mine, Thou wall, O wall, O sweet and
 lovely wall,  Show me thy chink to blink through with mine  eyne. Thanks, courteous wall. Jove shield thee well for this.  But what see I? No Thisbe do I
 see. O wicked wall, through whom I see no bliss,  Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me!
THESEUS  The wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.
BOTTOM  No, in truth, sir, he should not. “Deceiving me” is Thisbe’s cue. She is to enter now, and I am to spy her through the wall. You shall see it will fall
 pat as I told you. Yonder she comes. 

Enter Thisbe (Flute).

FLUTE, as Thisbe  O wall, full often hast thou heard my moans  For parting my fair Pyramus and me. My cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,  Thy stones with
lime and hair knit up in thee. 
BOTTOM, as Pyramus  I see a voice! Now will I to the chink  To spy an I can hear my Thisbe’s face. Thisbe?
FLUTE, as Thisbe  My love! Thou art my love, I think.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus   Think what thou wilt, I am thy lover’s grace, And, like Limander, am I trusty still.
FLUTE, as Thisbe  And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus  Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.
FLUTE, as Thisbe  As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus  O kiss me through the hole of this vile wall.
FLUTE, as Thisbe  I kiss the wall’s hole, not your lips at all.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus  Wilt thou at Ninny’s tomb meet me straightway?
FLUTE, as Thisbe  ’Tide life, ’tide death, I come without delay. Bottom and Flute exit.
SNOUT, as Wall  Thus have I, Wall, my part dischargèd so, And, being done, thus Wall away doth go.He exits.
THESEUS  Now is the wall down between the two neighbors.
DEMETRIUS  No remedy, my lord, when walls are so willful to hear without warning.
HIPPOLYTA  This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard.
THESEUS  The best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst are no worse, if imagination amend them.
HIPPOLYTA  It must be your imagination, then, and not theirs.
THESEUS  If we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass for excellent men. Here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.

Enter Lion (Snug) and Moonshine (Starveling).

SNUG, as Lion  You ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear  The smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on  floor, May now perchance both quake and tremble here,
When lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. Then know that I, as Snug the joiner, am A lion fell, nor else no lion’s dam; For if I should as lion come in strife
Into this place, ’twere pity on my life. 
THESEUS  A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.
DEMETRIUS  The very best at a beast, my lord, that e’er I saw.
LYSANDER  This lion is a very fox for his valor.
THESEUS  True, and a goose for his discretion.
DEMETRIUS  Not so, my lord, for his valor cannot carry his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
THESEUS  His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valor, for the goose carries not the fox. It is well. Leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the Moon.
STARVELING, as Moonshine  This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present.
DEMETRIUS  He should have worn the horns on his head.
THESEUS  He is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference.
STARVELING, as Moonshine  This lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present. Myself the man i’ th’ moon do seem to be.
THESEUS  This is the greatest error of all the rest; the man should be put into the lanthorn. How is it else “the man i’ th’ moon”?
DEMETRIUS  He dares not come there for the candle, for you see, it is already in snuff.
HIPPOLYTA  I am aweary of this moon. Would he would change.
THESEUS  It appears by his small light of discretion that he is in the wane; but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.
LYSANDER  Proceed, Moon.
STARVELING, as Moonshine   All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is the moon, I the man i’ th’ moon, this thornbush my thornbush, and this dog
my dog.
DEMETRIUS  Why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all these are in the moon. But silence. Here comes Thisbe.

Enter Thisbe (Flute).

FLUTE, as Thisbe  This is old Ninny’s tomb. Where is my love? SNUG, as Lion  O! The Lion roars. Thisbe runs off, dropping her mantle.
DEMETRIUS  Well roared, Lion.
THESEUS  Well run, Thisbe.
HIPPOLYTA  Well shone, Moon. Truly, the Moon shines with a good grace. Lion worries the mantle.
THESEUS  Well moused, Lion.

Enter Pyramus (Bottom).

DEMETRIUS  And then came Pyramus. Lion exits.
LYSANDER  And so the lion vanished.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus  Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy sunny beams.  I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright, For by thy gracious, golden, glittering
gleams,  I trust to take of truest Thisbe sight.—   But stay! O spite!   But mark, poor knight,  What dreadful dole is here!   Eyes, do you see!   How can it
be!  O dainty duck! O dear!   Thy mantle good—   What, stained with blood?  Approach, ye Furies fell!   O Fates, come, come,   Cut thread and thrum,  Quail,
crush, conclude, and quell! 
THESEUS  This passion, and the death of a dear friend, would go near to make a man look sad.
HIPPOLYTA  Beshrew my heart but I pity the man.
BOTTOM, as Pyramus  O, wherefore, Nature, didst thou lions frame,  Since lion vile hath here deflowered my dear, Which is—no, no—which was the fairest dame
That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with  cheer?   Come, tears, confound!   Out, sword, and wound  The pap of Pyramus;   Ay, that left pap,   Where
heart doth hop.Pyramus stabs himself.  Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.   Now am I dead;   Now am I fled;  My soul is in the sky.   Tongue, lose thy light!   Moon,
take thy flight!Moonshine exits.  Now die, die, die, die, die.Pyramus falls.
DEMETRIUS  No die, but an ace for him, for he is but one.
LYSANDER  Less than an ace, man, for he is dead, he is nothing.
THESEUS  With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and yet prove an ass.
HIPPOLYTA  How chance Moonshine is gone before Thisbe comes back and finds her lover?
THESEUS  She will find him by starlight.

Enter Thisbe (Flute).

Here she comes, and her passion ends the play.
HIPPOLYTA  Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus. I hope she will be brief.
DEMETRIUS  A mote will turn the balance, which Pyramus, which Thisbe, is the better: he for a man, God warrant us; she for a woman, God bless us.
LYSANDER  She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.
DEMETRIUS  And thus she means, videlicet—
FLUTE, as Thisbe     Asleep, my love?    What, dead, my dove?   O Pyramus, arise!    Speak, speak. Quite dumb?    Dead? Dead? A tomb   Must cover thy sweet
eyes.    These lily lips,    This cherry nose,   These yellow cowslip cheeks    Are gone, are gone!    Lovers, make moan;   His eyes were green as leeks.    O
Sisters Three,    Come, come to me   With hands as pale as milk.    Lay them in gore,    Since you have shore   With shears his thread of silk.    Tongue, not a
word!    Come, trusty sword,   Come, blade, my breast imbrue! Thisbe stabs herself.    And farewell, friends.    Thus Thisbe ends.   Adieu, adieu, adieu.Thisbe
falls. 
THESEUS  Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead.
DEMETRIUS  Ay, and Wall too. Bottom and Flute arise.
BOTTOM  No, I assure you, the wall is down that parted their fathers. Will it please you to see the Epilogue or to hear a Bergomask dance between two of our
company? 
THESEUS  No epilogue, I pray you. For your play needs no excuse. Never excuse. For when the players are all dead, there need none to be blamed. Marry, if he
that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself in Thisbe’s garter, it would have been a fine tragedy; and so it is, truly, and very notably discharged. But,
come, your Bergomask. Let your epilogue alone. Dance, and the players exit. The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve. Lovers, to bed! ’Tis almost fairy
time. I fear we shall outsleep the coming morn As much as we this night have overwatched. This palpable-gross play hath well beguiled The heavy gait of
night. Sweet friends, to bed. A fortnight hold we this solemnity In nightly revels and new jollity.They exit.

Enter Robin Goodfellow.

ROBIN   Now the hungry lion roars,   And the wolf behowls the moon,  Whilst the heavy plowman snores,   All with weary task fordone.  Now the wasted brands do
 glow,   Whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud,  Puts the wretch that lies in woe   In remembrance of a shroud.  Now it is the time of night   That the
 graves, all gaping wide,  Every one lets forth his sprite   In the church-way paths to glide.  And we fairies, that do run   By the triple Hecate’s team  From
 the presence of the sun,   Following darkness like a dream,  Now are frolic. Not a mouse  Shall disturb this hallowed house.  I am sent with broom before,  To
 sweep the dust behind the door. 

Enter Oberon and Titania, King and Queen of Fairies, with all their train.

OBERON   Through the house give glimmering light,   By the dead and drowsy fire.  Every elf and fairy sprite,   Hop as light as bird from brier,  And this ditty
after me,  Sing and dance it trippingly.
TITANIA   First rehearse your song by rote,  To each word a warbling note.  Hand in hand, with fairy grace,  Will we sing and bless this place. Oberon leads the
Fairies in song and dance. 
OBERON   Now, until the break of day,  Through this house each fairy stray.  To the best bride-bed will we,  Which by us shall blessèd be,  And the issue there
create  Ever shall be fortunate.  So shall all the couples three  Ever true in loving be,  And the blots of Nature’s hand  Shall not in their issue stand.
Never mole, harelip, nor scar,  Nor mark prodigious, such as are  Despisèd in nativity,  Shall upon their children be.  With this field-dew consecrate  Every
fairy take his gait,  And each several chamber bless,  Through this palace, with sweet peace.  And the owner of it blest,  Ever shall in safety rest.  Trip
away. Make no stay.  Meet me all by break of day. All but Robin exit.
ROBIN   If we shadows have offended,  Think but this and all is mended:  That you have but slumbered here  While these visions did appear.  And this weak and
idle theme,  No more yielding but a dream,  Gentles, do not reprehend.  If you pardon, we will mend.  And, as I am an honest Puck,  If we have unearnèd luck
Now to ’scape the serpent’s tongue,  We will make amends ere long.  Else the Puck a liar call.  So good night unto you all.  Give me your hands, if we be
friends,  And Robin shall restore amends. He exits.




The prologue of Romeo and Juliet calls the title characters “star-crossed lovers”—and the stars do seem to conspire against these young lovers.

Romeo is a Montague, and Juliet a Capulet. Their families are enmeshed in a feud, but the moment they meet—when Romeo and his friends attend a party at Juliet’s house in disguise—the two fall in love and quickly decide that they want to be married.

A friar secretly marries them, hoping to end the feud. Romeo and his companions almost immediately encounter Juliet’s cousin Tybalt, who challenges Romeo. When Romeo refuses to fight, Romeo’s friend Mercutio accepts the challenge and is killed. Romeo then kills Tybalt and is banished. He spends that night with Juliet and then leaves for Mantua.

Juliet’s father forces her into a marriage with Count Paris. To avoid this marriage, Juliet takes a potion, given her by the friar, that makes her appear dead. The friar will send Romeo word to be at her family tomb when she awakes. The plan goes awry, and Romeo learns instead that she is dead. In the tomb, Romeo kills himself. Juliet wakes, sees his body, and commits suicide. Their deaths appear finally to end the feud.

THE PROLOGUE
Enter Chorus.
 
Two households, both alike in dignity
(In fair Verona, where we lay our scene),
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
A pair of star-crossed lovers take their life;
Whose misadventured piteous overthrows
Doth with their death bury their parents’ strife.
The fearful passage of their death-marked love
And the continuance of their parents’ rage,
Which, but their children’s end, naught could remove,
Is now the two hours’ traffic of our stage;
The which, if you with patient ears attend,
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Chorus exits.

ACT 1
Scene 1Enter Sampson and Gregory, with swords and bucklers,
of the house of Capulet.

SAMPSON  Gregory, on my word we’ll not carry coals.
GREGORY  No, for then we should be colliers.
SAMPSON  I mean, an we be in choler, we’ll draw.
GREGORY  Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of
collar.
SAMPSON  I strike quickly, being moved.
GREGORY  But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
SAMPSON  A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
GREGORY  To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to
stand. Therefore if thou art moved thou runn’st
away.
SAMPSON  A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I
will take the wall of any man or maid of Montague’s.
GREGORY  That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest
goes to the wall.
SAMPSON  ’Tis true, and therefore women, being the
weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. Therefore
I will push Montague’s men from the wall and
thrust his maids to the wall.
GREGORY  The quarrel is between our masters and us
their men.
SAMPSON  ’Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant.
When I have fought with the men, I will be civil
with the maids; I will cut off their heads.
GREGORY  The heads of the maids?
SAMPSON  Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
GREGORY  They must take it in sense that feel it.
SAMPSON  Me they shall feel while I am able to stand,
and ’tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh.
GREGORY  ’Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou
hadst been poor-john. Draw thy tool. Here comes
of the house of Montagues.

Enter Abram with another Servingman.

SAMPSON  My naked weapon is out. Quarrel, I will back
thee.
GREGORY  How? Turn thy back and run?
SAMPSON  Fear me not.
GREGORY  No, marry. I fear thee!
SAMPSON  Let us take the law of our sides; let them
begin.
GREGORY  I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it
as they list.
SAMPSON  Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at
them, which is disgrace to them if they bear it.
He bites his thumb.
ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
SAMPSON  I do bite my thumb, sir.
ABRAM  Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
SAMPSON, aside to Gregory  Is the law of our side if I
say “Ay”?
GREGORY, aside to Sampson  No.
SAMPSON  No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir,
but I bite my thumb, sir.
GREGORY  Do you quarrel, sir?
ABRAM  Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
SAMPSON  But if you do, sir, I am for you. I serve as
good a man as you.
ABRAM  No better.
SAMPSON  Well, sir.

Enter Benvolio.

GREGORY, aside to Sampson  Say “better”; here comes
one of my master’s kinsmen.
SAMPSON  Yes, better, sir.
ABRAM  You lie.
SAMPSON  Draw if you be men.—Gregory, remember
thy washing blow.They fight.
BENVOLIO  Part, fools!Drawing his sword.
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.

Enter Tybalt, drawing his sword.

TYBALT 
What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio; look upon thy death.
BENVOLIO 
I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Or manage it to part these men with me.
TYBALT 
What, drawn and talk of peace? I hate the word
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!They fight.

Enter three or four Citizens with clubs or partisans.

CITIZENS 
Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! Beat them down!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

Enter old Capulet in his gown, and his Wife.

CAPULET 
What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
LADY CAPULET 
A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a
sword?

Enter old Montague and his Wife.
CAPULET 
My sword, I say. Old Montague is come
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
MONTAGUE 
Thou villain Capulet!—Hold me not; let me go.
LADY MONTAGUE 
Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.

Enter Prince Escalus with his train.

PRINCE 
Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel—
Will they not hear?—What ho! You men, you beasts,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
With purple fountains issuing from your veins:
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground,
And hear the sentence of your movèd prince.
Three civil brawls bred of an airy word
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets
And made Verona’s ancient citizens
Cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments
To wield old partisans in hands as old,
Cankered with peace, to part your cankered hate.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For this time all the rest depart away.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me,
And, Montague, come you this afternoon
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To old Free-town, our common judgment-place.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
All but Montague, Lady Montague,
and Benvolio exit.
MONTAGUE, to Benvolio 
Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
BENVOLIO 
Here were the servants of your adversary,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
The fiery Tybalt with his sword prepared,
Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows
Came more and more and fought on part and part,
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
LADY MONTAGUE 
O, where is Romeo? Saw you him today?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
BENVOLIO 
Madam, an hour before the worshiped sun
Peered forth the golden window of the east,
A troubled mind drove me to walk abroad,
Where underneath the grove of sycamore
That westward rooteth from this city side,
So early walking did I see your son.
Towards him I made, but he was ’ware of me
And stole into the covert of the wood.
I, measuring his affections by my own
(Which then most sought where most might not be
found,
Being one too many by my weary self),
Pursued my humor, not pursuing his,
And gladly shunned who gladly fled from me.
MONTAGUE 
Many a morning hath he there been seen,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning’s dew,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs.
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
Should in the farthest east begin to draw
The shady curtains from Aurora’s bed,
Away from light steals home my heavy son
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out,
And makes himself an artificial night.
Black and portentous must this humor prove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
BENVOLIO 
My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
MONTAGUE 
I neither know it nor can learn of him.
BENVOLIO 
Have you importuned him by any means?
MONTAGUE 
Both by myself and many other friends.
But he, his own affections’ counselor,
Is to himself—I will not say how true,
But to himself so secret and so close,
So far from sounding and discovery,
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Or dedicate his beauty to the same.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
We would as willingly give cure as know.

Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO 
See where he comes. So please you, step aside.
I’ll know his grievance or be much denied.
MONTAGUE 
I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
To hear true shrift.—Come, madam, let’s away.
Montague and Lady Montague exit.
BENVOLIO 
Good morrow, cousin.
ROMEO  Is the day so young?
BENVOLIO 
But new struck nine.
ROMEO  Ay me, sad hours seem long.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
BENVOLIO 
It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo’s hours?
ROMEO 
Not having that which, having, makes them short.
BENVOLIO  In love?
ROMEO  Out—
BENVOLIO  Of love?
ROMEO 
Out of her favor where I am in love.
BENVOLIO 
Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
ROMEO 
Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Where shall we dine?—O me! What fray was here?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Here’s much to do with hate, but more with love.
Why then, O brawling love, O loving hate,
O anything of nothing first create!
O heavy lightness, serious vanity,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms,
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health,
Still-waking sleep that is not what it is!
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Dost thou not laugh?
BENVOLIO  No, coz, I rather weep.
ROMEO 
Good heart, at what?
BENVOLIO  At thy good heart’s oppression.
ROMEO  Why, such is love’s transgression.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Which thou wilt propagate to have it pressed
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Love is a smoke made with the fume of sighs;
Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers’ eyes;
Being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Farewell, my coz.
BENVOLIO  Soft, I will go along.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
ROMEO 
Tut, I have lost myself. I am not here.
This is not Romeo. He’s some other where.
BENVOLIO 
Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
ROMEO  What, shall I groan and tell thee?
BENVOLIO 
Groan? Why, no. But sadly tell me who.
ROMEO 
A sick man in sadness makes his will—
A word ill urged to one that is so ill.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
BENVOLIO 
I aimed so near when I supposed you loved.
ROMEO 
A right good markman! And she’s fair I love.
BENVOLIO 
A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
ROMEO 
Well in that hit you miss. She’ll not be hit
With Cupid’s arrow. She hath Dian’s wit,
And, in strong proof of chastity well armed,
From love’s weak childish bow she lives uncharmed.
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Nor bide th’ encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
O, she is rich in beauty, only poor
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
BENVOLIO 
Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
ROMEO 
She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
For beauty, starved with her severity,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Do I live dead, that live to tell it now.
BENVOLIO 
Be ruled by me. Forget to think of her.
ROMEO 
O, teach me how I should forget to think!
BENVOLIO 
By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Examine other beauties.
ROMEO  ’Tis the way
To call hers, exquisite, in question more.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies’ brows,
Being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair;
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Where I may read who passed that passing fair?
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
BENVOLIO 
I’ll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.
They exit.



Scene 2Enter Capulet, County Paris, and a Servingman.

CAPULET 
But Montague is bound as well as I,
In penalty alike, and ’tis not hard, I think,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
PARIS 
Of honorable reckoning are you both,
And pity ’tis you lived at odds so long.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
CAPULET 
But saying o’er what I have said before.
My child is yet a stranger in the world.
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years.
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
PARIS 
Younger than she are happy mothers made.
CAPULET 
And too soon marred are those so early made.
Earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
She’s the hopeful lady of my earth.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
My will to her consent is but a part.
And, she agreed, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
This night I hold an old accustomed feast,
Whereto I have invited many a guest
Such as I love; and you among the store,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
At my poor house look to behold this night
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
When well-appareled April on the heel
Of limping winter treads, even such delight
Among fresh fennel buds shall you this night
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
May stand in number, though in reck’ning none.
Come go with me.To Servingman, giving him a list.
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona, find those persons out
Whose names are written there, and to them say
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Capulet and Paris exit.
SERVINGMAN  Find them out whose names are written
here! It is written that the shoemaker should
meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the
fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets.
But I am sent to find those persons whose names
are here writ, and can never find what names the
writing person hath here writ. I must to the learned.
In good time!

Enter Benvolio and Romeo.

BENVOLIO, to Romeo 
Tut, man, one fire burns out another’s burning;
One pain is lessened by another’s anguish.
Turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning.
One desperate grief cures with another’s languish.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
ROMEO 
Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
BENVOLIO 
For what, I pray thee?
ROMEO  For your broken shin.
BENVOLIO  Why Romeo, art thou mad?
ROMEO 
Not mad, but bound more than a madman is,
Shut up in prison, kept without my food,
Whipped and tormented, and—good e’en, good
fellow.
SERVINGMAN  God gi’ good e’en. I pray, sir, can you
read?
ROMEO 
Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
SERVINGMAN  Perhaps you have learned it without
book. But I pray, can you read anything you see?
ROMEO 
Ay, if I know the letters and the language.
SERVINGMAN  You say honestly. Rest you merry.
ROMEO  Stay, fellow. I can read.(He reads the letter.)
Signior Martino and his wife and daughters,
County Anselme and his beauteous sisters,
The lady widow of Vitruvio,
Signior Placentio and his lovely nieces,
Mercutio and his brother Valentine,
Mine Uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters,
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia,
Signior Valentio and his cousin Tybalt,
Lucio and the lively Helena.
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
SERVINGMAN  Up.
ROMEO  Whither? To supper?
SERVINGMAN  To our house.
ROMEO  Whose house?
SERVINGMAN  My master’s.
ROMEO 
Indeed I should have asked thee that before.
SERVINGMAN  Now I’ll tell you without asking. My
master is the great rich Capulet, and, if you be not
of the house of Montagues, I pray come and crush a
cup of wine. Rest you merry.He exits.
BENVOLIO 
At this same ancient feast of Capulet’s
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so loves,
With all the admirèd beauties of Verona.
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
ROMEO 
When the devout religion of mine eye
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fire;
And these who, often drowned, could never die,
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
Ne’er saw her match since first the world begun.
BENVOLIO 
Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,
Herself poised with herself in either eye;
But in that crystal scales let there be weighed
Your lady’s love against some other maid
That I will show you shining at this feast,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
ROMEO 
I’ll go along, no such sight to be shown,
But to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
They exit.



Scene 3Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET 
Nurse, where’s my daughter? Call her forth to me.
NURSE 
Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
I bade her come.—What, lamb! What, ladybird!
God forbid. Where’s this girl? What, Juliet!

Enter Juliet.

JULIET  How now, who calls?
NURSE  Your mother.
JULIET 
Madam, I am here. What is your will?
LADY CAPULET 
This is the matter.—Nurse, give leave awhile.
We must talk in secret.—Nurse, come back again.
I have remembered me, thou ’s hear our counsel.
Thou knowest my daughter’s of a pretty age.
NURSE 
Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
LADY CAPULET  She’s not fourteen.
NURSE  I’ll lay fourteen of my teeth (and yet, to my teen
be it spoken, I have but four) she’s not fourteen.
How long is it now to Lammastide?
LADY CAPULET  A fortnight and odd days.
NURSE 
Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
That shall she. Marry, I remember it well.
’Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,
And she was weaned (I never shall forget it)
Of all the days of the year, upon that day.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug.
“Shake,” quoth the dovehouse. ’Twas no need, I
trow,
To bid me trudge.
And since that time it is eleven years.
For then she could stand high-lone. Nay, by th’
rood,
She could have run and waddled all about,
For even the day before, she broke her brow,
And then my husband (God be with his soul,
He was a merry man) took up the child.
“Yea,” quoth he, “Dost thou fall upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,
Wilt thou not, Jule?” And, by my holidam,
The pretty wretch left crying and said “Ay.”
To see now how a jest shall come about!
I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,
I never should forget it. “Wilt thou not, Jule?”
quoth he.
And, pretty fool, it stinted and said “Ay.”
LADY CAPULET 
Enough of this. I pray thee, hold thy peace.
NURSE 
Yes, madam, yet I cannot choose but laugh
To think it should leave crying and say “Ay.”
And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow
A bump as big as a young cock’rel’s stone,
A perilous knock, and it cried bitterly.
“Yea,” quoth my husband. “Fall’st upon thy face?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,
Wilt thou not, Jule?” It stinted and said “Ay.”
JULIET 
And stint thou, too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
NURSE 
Peace. I have done. God mark thee to his grace,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e’er I nursed.
An I might live to see thee married once,
I have my wish.
LADY CAPULET 
Marry, that “marry” is the very theme
I came to talk of.—Tell me, daughter Juliet,
How stands your disposition to be married?
JULIET 
It is an honor that I dream not of.
NURSE 
An honor? Were not I thine only nurse,
I would say thou hadst sucked wisdom from thy
teat.
LADY CAPULET 
Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Are made already mothers. By my count
I was your mother much upon these years
That you are now a maid. Thus, then, in brief:
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
NURSE 
A man, young lady—lady, such a man
As all the world—why, he’s a man of wax.
LADY CAPULET 
Verona’s summer hath not such a flower.
NURSE 
Nay, he’s a flower, in faith, a very flower.
LADY CAPULET 
What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Read o’er the volume of young Paris’ face,
And find delight writ there with beauty’s pen.
Examine every married lineament
And see how one another lends content,
And what obscured in this fair volume lies
Find written in the margent of his eyes.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
The fish lives in the sea, and ’tis much pride
For fair without the fair within to hide.
That book in many’s eyes doth share the glory
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story.
So shall you share all that he doth possess
By having him, making yourself no less.
NURSE 
No less? Nay, bigger. Women grow by men.
LADY CAPULET 
Speak briefly. Can you like of Paris’ love?
JULIET 
I’ll look to like, if looking liking move.
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.

Enter Servingman.

SERVINGMAN  Madam, the guests are come, supper
served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the
Nurse cursed in the pantry, and everything in
extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you,
follow straight.
LADY CAPULET 
We follow thee.Servingman exits.
Juliet, the County stays.
NURSE 
Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
They exit.


Scene 4Enter Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, with five or six other
Maskers, Torchbearers, and a Boy with a drum.

ROMEO 
What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Or shall we on without apology?
BENVOLIO 
The date is out of such prolixity.
We’ll have no Cupid hoodwinked with a scarf,
Bearing a Tartar’s painted bow of lath,
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
After the prompter, for our entrance.
But let them measure us by what they will.
We’ll measure them a measure and be gone.
ROMEO 
Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Being but heavy I will bear the light.
MERCUTIO 
Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
ROMEO 
Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
With nimble soles. I have a soul of lead
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
MERCUTIO 
You are a lover. Borrow Cupid’s wings
And soar with them above a common bound.
ROMEO 
I am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft
To soar with his light feathers, and so bound
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Under love’s heavy burden do I sink.
MERCUTIO 
And to sink in it should you burden love—
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
ROMEO 
Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Too rude, too boist’rous, and it pricks like thorn.
MERCUTIO 
If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.—
Give me a case to put my visage in.—
A visor for a visor. What care I
What curious eye doth cote deformities?
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
BENVOLIO 
Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in
But every man betake him to his legs.
ROMEO 
A torch for me. Let wantons light of heart
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,
For I am proverbed with a grandsire phrase:
I’ll be a candle holder and look on;
The game was ne’er so fair, and I am done.
MERCUTIO 
Tut, dun’s the mouse, the constable’s own word.
If thou art dun, we’ll draw thee from the mire—
Or, save your reverence, love—wherein thou
stickest
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
ROMEO 
Nay, that’s not so.
MERCUTIO  I mean, sir, in delay
We waste our lights; in vain, light lights by day.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
ROMEO 
And we mean well in going to this masque,
But ’tis no wit to go.
MERCUTIO  Why, may one ask?
ROMEO 
I dreamt a dream tonight.
MERCUTIO  And so did I.
ROMEO 
Well, what was yours?
MERCUTIO  That dreamers often lie.
ROMEO 
In bed asleep while they do dream things true.
MERCUTIO 
O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
She is the fairies’ midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomi
Over men’s noses as they lie asleep.
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners’ legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
Her traces of the smallest spider web,
Her collars of the moonshine’s wat’ry beams,
Her whip of cricket’s bone, the lash of film,
Her wagoner a small gray-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out o’ mind the fairies’ coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night
Through lovers’ brains, and then they dream of love;
On courtiers’ knees, that dream on cur’sies straight;
O’er lawyers’ fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O’er ladies’ lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Sometime she gallops o’er a courtier’s nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit.
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig’s tail,
Tickling a parson’s nose as he lies asleep;
Then he dreams of another benefice.
Sometime she driveth o’er a soldier’s neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep, and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage.
This is she—
ROMEO  Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace.
Thou talk’st of nothing.
MERCUTIO  True, I talk of dreams,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who woos
Even now the frozen bosom of the north
And, being angered, puffs away from thence,
Turning his side to the dew-dropping south.
BENVOLIO 
This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
ROMEO 
I fear too early, for my mind misgives
Some consequence yet hanging in the stars
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
With this night’s revels, and expire the term
Of a despisèd life closed in my breast
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
Direct my sail. On, lusty gentlemen.
BENVOLIO  Strike, drum.
They march about the stage
and then withdraw to the side.




Scene 5Servingmen come forth with napkins.

FIRST SERVINGMAN  Where’s Potpan that he helps not
to take away? He shift a trencher? He scrape a
trencher?
SECOND SERVINGMAN  When good manners shall lie
all in one or two men’s hands, and they unwashed
too, ’tis a foul thing.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  Away with the joint stools, remove
the court cupboard, look to the plate.—
Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone
and Nell.—Anthony and Potpan!
THIRD SERVINGMAN  Ay, boy, ready.
FIRST SERVINGMAN  You are looked for and called for,
asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.
THIRD SERVINGMAN  We cannot be here and there too.
Cheerly, boys! Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver
take all.They move aside.

Enter Capulet and his household, all the guests and
gentlewomen to Romeo, Mercutio, Benvolio, and the
other Maskers.

CAPULET 
Welcome, gentlemen. Ladies that have their toes
Unplagued with corns will walk a bout with
you.—
Ah, my mistresses, which of you all
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
She, I’ll swear, hath corns. Am I come near you
now?—
Welcome, gentlemen. I have seen the day
That I have worn a visor and could tell
A whispering tale in a fair lady’s ear,
Such as would please. ’Tis gone, ’tis gone, ’tis gone.
You are welcome, gentlemen.—Come, musicians,
play.Music plays and they dance.
A hall, a hall, give room!—And foot it, girls.—
More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up,
And quench the fire; the room is grown too hot.—
Ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well.—
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
How long is ’t now since last yourself and I
Were in a mask?
CAPULET’S COUSIN  By ’r Lady, thirty years.
CAPULET 
What, man, ’tis not so much, ’tis not so much.
’Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Some five and twenty years, and then we masked.
CAPULET’S COUSIN 
’Tis more, ’tis more. His son is elder, sir.
His son is thirty.
CAPULET  Will you tell me that?
His son was but a ward two years ago.
ROMEO, to a Servingman 
What lady’s that which doth enrich the hand
Of yonder knight?
SERVINGMAN  I know not, sir.
ROMEO 
O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
As a rich jewel in an Ethiop’s ear—
Beauty too rich for use, for Earth too dear.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
As yonder lady o’er her fellows shows.
The measure done, I’ll watch her place of stand
And, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight,
For I ne’er saw true beauty till this night.
TYBALT 
This, by his voice, should be a Montague.—
Fetch me my rapier, boy.Page exits.
What, dares the slave
Come hither covered with an antic face
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Now, by the stock and honor of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
CAPULET 
Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
TYBALT 
Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,
A villain that is hither come in spite
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
CAPULET 
Young Romeo is it?
TYBALT  ’Tis he, that villain Romeo.
CAPULET 
Content thee, gentle coz. Let him alone.
He bears him like a portly gentleman,
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
To be a virtuous and well-governed youth.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Therefore be patient. Take no note of him.
It is my will, the which if thou respect,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
TYBALT 
It fits when such a villain is a guest.
I’ll not endure him.
CAPULET  He shall be endured.
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to.
Am I the master here or you? Go to.
You’ll not endure him! God shall mend my soul,
You’ll make a mutiny among my guests,
You will set cock-a-hoop, you’ll be the man!
TYBALT 
Why, uncle, ’tis a shame.
CAPULET  Go to, go to.
You are a saucy boy. Is ’t so indeed?
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
You must contrary me. Marry, ’tis time—
Well said, my hearts.—You are a princox, go.
Be quiet, or—More light, more light!—for shame,
I’ll make you quiet.—What, cheerly, my hearts!
TYBALT 
Patience perforce with willful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
I will withdraw, but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt’rest gall.
He exits.
ROMEO, taking Juliet’s hand 
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
This holy shrine, the gentle sin is this:
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
JULIET 
Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
For saints have hands that pilgrims’ hands do touch,
And palm to palm is holy palmers’ kiss.
ROMEO 
Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
JULIET 
Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
ROMEO 
O then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do.
They pray: grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
JULIET 
Saints do not move, though grant for prayers’ sake.
ROMEO 
Then move not while my prayer’s effect I take.
He kisses her.
Thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.
JULIET 
Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
ROMEO 
Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urged!
Give me my sin again.He kisses her.
JULIET  You kiss by th’ book.
NURSE 
Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Juliet moves toward her mother.
ROMEO 
What is her mother?
NURSE  Marry, bachelor,
Her mother is the lady of the house,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
I nursed her daughter that you talked withal.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Shall have the chinks.Nurse moves away.
ROMEO, aside  Is she a Capulet?
O dear account! My life is my foe’s debt.
BENVOLIO 
Away, begone. The sport is at the best.
ROMEO 
Ay, so I fear. The more is my unrest.
CAPULET 
Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.—
Is it e’en so? Why then, I thank you all.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.—
More torches here.—Come on then, let’s to bed.—
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late.
I’ll to my rest.
All but Juliet and the Nurse begin to exit.
JULIET 
Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
NURSE 
The son and heir of old Tiberio.
JULIET 
What’s he that now is going out of door?
NURSE 
Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
JULIET 
What’s he that follows here, that would not dance?
NURSE  I know not.
JULIET 
Go ask his name. The Nurse goes. If he be marrièd,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
NURSE, returning 
His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
The only son of your great enemy.
JULIET 
My only love sprung from my only hate!
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
That I must love a loathèd enemy.
NURSE 
What’s this? What’s this?
JULIET  A rhyme I learned even now
Of one I danced withal.
One calls within “Juliet.”
NURSE  Anon, anon.
Come, let’s away. The strangers all are gone.
They exit.



ACT 2

Enter Chorus.
 
Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
And young affection gapes to be his heir.
That fair for which love groaned for and would die,
With tender Juliet matched, is now not fair.
Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,
Alike bewitchèd by the charm of looks,
But to his foe supposed he must complain,
And she steal love’s sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
And she as much in love, her means much less
To meet her new belovèd anywhere.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Temp’ring extremities with extreme sweet.
Chorus exits.



Scene 1Enter Romeo alone.

ROMEO 
Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.
He withdraws.

Enter Benvolio with Mercutio.

BENVOLIO 
Romeo, my cousin Romeo, Romeo!
MERCUTIO  He is wise
And, on my life, hath stol’n him home to bed.
BENVOLIO 
He ran this way and leapt this orchard wall.
Call, good Mercutio.
MERCUTIO  Nay, I’ll conjure too.
Romeo! Humors! Madman! Passion! Lover!
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh.
Speak but one rhyme and I am satisfied.
Cry but “Ay me,” pronounce but “love” and
“dove.”
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
Young Abraham Cupid, he that shot so trim
When King Cophetua loved the beggar maid.—
He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.—
I conjure thee by Rosaline’s bright eyes,
By her high forehead, and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us.
BENVOLIO 
An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
MERCUTIO 
This cannot anger him. ’Twould anger him
To raise a spirit in his mistress’ circle
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Till she had laid it and conjured it down.
That were some spite. My invocation
Is fair and honest. In his mistress’ name,
I conjure only but to raise up him.
BENVOLIO 
Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
MERCUTIO 
If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.—
O Romeo, that she were, O, that she were
An open-arse, thou a pop’rin pear.
Romeo, good night. I’ll to my truckle bed;
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.—
Come, shall we go?
BENVOLIO  Go, then, for ’tis in vain
To seek him here that means not to be found.
They
 exit.


Scene 2Romeo comes forward.

ROMEO 
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.

Enter Juliet above.

But soft, what light through yonder window breaks?
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That thou, her maid, art far more fair than she.
Be not her maid since she is envious.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
It is my lady. O, it is my love!
O, that she knew she were!
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
I am too bold. ’Tis not to me she speaks.
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The brightness of her cheek would shame those
stars
As daylight doth a lamp; her eye in heaven
Would through the airy region stream so bright
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand.
O, that I were a glove upon that hand,
That I might touch that cheek!
JULIET  Ay me.
ROMEO, aside  She speaks.
O, speak again, bright angel, for thou art
As glorious to this night, being o’er my head,
As is a wingèd messenger of heaven
Unto the white-upturnèd wond’ring eyes
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
When he bestrides the lazy puffing clouds
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
JULIET 
O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou Romeo?
Deny thy father and refuse thy name,
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
And I’ll no longer be a Capulet.
ROMEO, aside 
Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
JULIET 
’Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
What’s Montague? It is nor hand, nor foot,
Nor arm, nor face. O, be some other name
Belonging to a man.
What’s in a name? That which we call a rose
By any other word would smell as sweet.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo called,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,
And, for thy name, which is no part of thee,
Take all myself.
ROMEO  I take thee at thy word.
Call me but love, and I’ll be new baptized.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
JULIET 
What man art thou that, thus bescreened in night,
So stumblest on my counsel?
ROMEO  By a name
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
JULIET 
My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Of thy tongue’s uttering, yet I know the sound.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
ROMEO 
Neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
JULIET 
How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
ROMEO 
With love’s light wings did I o’erperch these walls,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
JULIET 
If they do see thee, they will murder thee.
ROMEO 
Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Than twenty of their swords. Look thou but sweet,
And I am proof against their enmity.
JULIET 
I would not for the world they saw thee here.
ROMEO 
I have night’s cloak to hide me from their eyes,
And, but thou love me, let them find me here.
My life were better ended by their hate
Than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.
JULIET 
By whose direction found’st thou out this place?
ROMEO 
By love, that first did prompt me to inquire.
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
As that vast shore washed with the farthest sea,
I should adventure for such merchandise.
JULIET 
Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
For that which thou hast heard me speak tonight.
Fain would I dwell on form; fain, fain deny
What I have spoke. But farewell compliment.
Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say “Ay,”
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear’st,
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers’ perjuries,
They say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Or, if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
I’ll frown and be perverse and say thee nay,
So thou wilt woo, but else not for the world.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
And therefore thou mayst think my havior light.
But trust me, gentleman, I’ll prove more true
Than those that have more coying to be strange.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But that thou overheard’st ere I was ware
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
Which the dark night hath so discoverèd.
ROMEO 
Lady, by yonder blessèd moon I vow,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops—
JULIET 
O, swear not by the moon, th’ inconstant moon,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
ROMEO 
What shall I swear by?
JULIET  Do not swear at all.
Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
And I’ll believe thee.
ROMEO  If my heart’s dear love—
JULIET 
Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
I have no joy of this contract tonight.
It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say “It lightens.” Sweet, good night.
This bud of love, by summer’s ripening breath,
May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet.
Good night, good night. As sweet repose and rest
Come to thy heart as that within my breast.
ROMEO 
O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
JULIET 
What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
ROMEO 
Th’ exchange of thy love’s faithful vow for mine.
JULIET 
I gave thee mine before thou didst request it,
And yet I would it were to give again.
ROMEO 
Wouldst thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
JULIET 
But to be frank and give it thee again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My love as deep. The more I give to thee,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
Nurse calls from within.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu.—
Anon, good nurse.—Sweet Montague, be true.
Stay but a little; I will come again.She exits.
ROMEO 
O blessèd, blessèd night! I am afeard,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Too flattering sweet to be substantial.

Reenter Juliet above.

JULIET 
Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
If that thy bent of love be honorable,
Thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow,
By one that I’ll procure to come to thee,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,
And all my fortunes at thy foot I’ll lay
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
NURSE, within  Madam.
JULIET 
I come anon.—But if thou meanest not well,
I do beseech thee—
NURSE, within  Madam.
JULIET  By and by, I come.—
To cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
Tomorrow will I send.
ROMEO  So thrive my soul—
JULIET  A thousand times good night.She exits.
ROMEO 
A thousand times the worse to want thy light.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their
books,
But love from love, toward school with heavy looks.
Going.

Enter Juliet above again.

JULIET 
Hist, Romeo, hist! O, for a falc’ner’s voice
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud,
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
With repetition of “My Romeo!”
ROMEO 
It is my soul that calls upon my name.
How silver-sweet sound lovers’ tongues by night,
Like softest music to attending ears.
JULIET 
Romeo.
ROMEO  My dear.
JULIET  What o’clock tomorrow
Shall I send to thee?
ROMEO  By the hour of nine.
JULIET 
I will not fail. ’Tis twenty year till then.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
ROMEO 
Let me stand here till thou remember it.
JULIET 
I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Rememb’ring how I love thy company.
ROMEO 
And I’ll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Forgetting any other home but this.
JULIET 
’Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone,
And yet no farther than a wanton’s bird,
That lets it hop a little from his hand,
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
And with a silken thread plucks it back again,
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
ROMEO 
I would I were thy bird.
JULIET  Sweet, so would I.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Good night, good night. Parting is such sweet
sorrow
That I shall say “Good night” till it be morrow.
She exits.
ROMEO 
Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast.
Would I were sleep and peace so sweet to rest.
Hence will I to my ghostly friar’s close cell,
His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell.
He exits.


Scene 3Enter Friar Lawrence alone with a basket.

FRIAR LAWRENCE 
The gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Check’ring the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day’s path and Titan’s fiery wheels.
Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,
The day to cheer and night’s dank dew to dry,
I must upfill this osier cage of ours
With baleful weeds and precious-juicèd flowers.
The Earth that’s nature’s mother is her tomb;
What is her burying grave, that is her womb;
And from her womb children of divers kind
We sucking on her natural bosom find,
Many for many virtues excellent,
None but for some, and yet all different.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities.
For naught so vile that on the Earth doth live
But to the Earth some special good doth give;
Nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use,
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
And vice sometime by action dignified.

Enter Romeo.

Within the infant rind of this weak flower
Poison hath residence and medicine power:
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each
part;
Being tasted, stays all senses with the heart.
Two such opposèd kings encamp them still
In man as well as herbs—grace and rude will;
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
ROMEO 
Good morrow, father.
FRIAR LAWRENCE  Benedicite.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
So soon to bid “Good morrow” to thy bed.
Care keeps his watch in every old man’s eye,
And, where care lodges, sleep will never lie;
But where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth
reign.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Thou art uproused with some distemp’rature,
Or, if not so, then here I hit it right:
Our Romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
ROMEO 
That last is true. The sweeter rest was mine.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
ROMEO 
With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
I have forgot that name and that name’s woe.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
That’s my good son. But where hast thou been
then?
ROMEO 
I’ll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
That’s by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
I bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo,
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
ROMEO 
Then plainly know my heart’s dear love is set
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And all combined, save what thou must combine
By holy marriage. When and where and how
We met, we wooed, and made exchange of vow
I’ll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,
That thou consent to marry us today.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
So soon forsaken? Young men’s love then lies
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine
Hath washed thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
How much salt water thrown away in waste
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Thy old groans yet ringing in mine ancient ears.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Of an old tear that is not washed off yet.
If e’er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
And art thou changed? Pronounce this sentence
then:
Women may fall when there’s no strength in men.
ROMEO 
Thou chid’st me oft for loving Rosaline.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
ROMEO 
And bad’st me bury love.
FRIAR LAWRENCE  Not in a grave
To lay one in, another out to have.
ROMEO 
I pray thee, chide me not. Her I love now
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
The other did not so.
FRIAR LAWRENCE  O, she knew well
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
But come, young waverer, come, go with me.
In one respect I’ll thy assistant be,
For this alliance may so happy prove
To turn your households’ rancor to pure love.
ROMEO 
O, let us hence. I stand on sudden haste.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Wisely and slow. They stumble that run fast.
They exit.


Scene 4Enter Benvolio and Mercutio.

MERCUTIO 
Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Came he not home tonight?
BENVOLIO 
Not to his father’s. I spoke with his man.
MERCUTIO 
Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that
Rosaline,
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
BENVOLIO 
Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Hath sent a letter to his father’s house.
MERCUTIO  A challenge, on my life.
BENVOLIO  Romeo will answer it.
MERCUTIO  Any man that can write may answer a letter.
BENVOLIO  Nay, he will answer the letter’s master, how
he dares, being dared.
MERCUTIO  Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead,
stabbed with a white wench’s black eye, run
through the ear with a love-song, the very pin of his
heart cleft with the blind bow-boy’s butt shaft. And
is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
BENVOLIO  Why, what is Tybalt?
MERCUTIO  More than prince of cats. O, he’s the courageous
captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion.
He rests his minim rests, one, two, and the third in
your bosom—the very butcher of a silk button, a
duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house
of the first and second cause. Ah, the immortal
passado, the punto reverso, the hay!
BENVOLIO  The what?
MERCUTIO  The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting
phantasimes, these new tuners of accent: “By
Jesu, a very good blade! A very tall man! A very good
whore!” Why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire,
that we should be thus afflicted with these
strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these “pardon-me” ’s,
who stand so much on the new form
that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? O their
bones, their bones!

Enter Romeo.

BENVOLIO  Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo.
MERCUTIO  Without his roe, like a dried herring. O
flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! Now is he for the
numbers that Petrarch flowed in. Laura to his lady
was a kitchen wench (marry, she had a better love
to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a gray
eye or so, but not to the purpose.—Signior Romeo,
bonjour. There’s a French salutation to your French
slop. You gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
ROMEO  Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit
did I give you?
MERCUTIO  The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
ROMEO  Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was
great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain
courtesy.
MERCUTIO  That’s as much as to say such a case as
yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
ROMEO  Meaning, to curtsy.
MERCUTIO  Thou hast most kindly hit it.
ROMEO  A most courteous exposition.
MERCUTIO  Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
ROMEO  “Pink” for flower.
MERCUTIO  Right.
ROMEO  Why, then is my pump well flowered.
MERCUTIO  Sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou
hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole
of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing,
solely singular.
ROMEO  O single-soled jest, solely singular for the
singleness.
MERCUTIO  Come between us, good Benvolio. My wits
faints.
ROMEO  Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I’ll cry
a match.
MERCUTIO  Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I
am done, for thou hast more of the wild goose in
one of thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole
five. Was I with you there for the goose?
ROMEO  Thou wast never with me for anything when
thou wast not there for the goose.
MERCUTIO  I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
ROMEO  Nay, good goose, bite not.
MERCUTIO  Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most
sharp sauce.
ROMEO  And is it not, then, well served into a sweet
goose?
MERCUTIO  O, here’s a wit of cheveril that stretches
from an inch narrow to an ell broad.
ROMEO  I stretch it out for that word “broad,” which
added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a
broad goose.
MERCUTIO  Why, is not this better now than groaning
for love? Now art thou sociable, now art thou
Romeo, now art thou what thou art, by art as well as
by nature. For this driveling love is like a great
natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his
bauble in a hole.
BENVOLIO  Stop there, stop there.
MERCUTIO  Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against
the hair.
BENVOLIO  Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
MERCUTIO  O, thou art deceived. I would have made it
short, for I was come to the whole depth of my tale
and meant indeed to occupy the argument no
longer.

Enter Nurse and her man Peter.

ROMEO  Here’s goodly gear. A sail, a sail!
MERCUTIO  Two, two—a shirt and a smock.
NURSE  Peter.
PETER  Anon.
NURSE  My fan, Peter.
MERCUTIO  Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan’s
the fairer face.
NURSE  God you good morrow, gentlemen.
MERCUTIO  God you good e’en, fair gentlewoman.
NURSE  Is it good e’en?
MERCUTIO  ’Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of
the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
NURSE  Out upon you! What a man are you?
ROMEO  One, gentlewoman, that God hath made, himself
to mar.
NURSE  By my troth, it is well said: “for himself to
mar,” quoth he? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me
where I may find the young Romeo?
ROMEO  I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older
when you have found him than he was when you
sought him. I am the youngest of that name, for
fault of a worse.
NURSE  You say well.
MERCUTIO  Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i’
faith, wisely, wisely.
NURSE  If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with
you.
BENVOLIO  She will indite him to some supper.
MERCUTIO  A bawd, a bawd, a bawd. So ho!
ROMEO  What hast thou found?
MERCUTIO  No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a Lenten
pie that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
 An old hare hoar,
 And an old hare hoar,
  Is very good meat in Lent.
 But a hare that is hoar
 Is too much for a score
  When it hoars ere it be spent.
Romeo, will you come to your father’s? We’ll to
dinner thither.
ROMEO  I will follow you.
MERCUTIO  Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell, lady, lady,
lady.Mercutio and Benvolio exit.
NURSE  I pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this
that was so full of his ropery?
ROMEO  A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself
talk and will speak more in a minute than he will
stand to in a month.
NURSE  An he speak anything against me, I’ll take him
down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty
such jacks. An if I cannot, I’ll find those that shall.
Scurvy knave, I am none of his flirt-gills; I am none
of his skains-mates. To Peter. And thou must stand
by too and suffer every knave to use me at his
pleasure.
PETER  I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had,
my weapon should quickly have been out. I warrant
you, I dare draw as soon as another man, if I
see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law on my
side.
NURSE  Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part
about me quivers. Scurvy knave! To Romeo. Pray
you, sir, a word. And, as I told you, my young lady
bid me inquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
keep to myself. But first let me tell you, if you
should lead her in a fool’s paradise, as they say, it
were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say. For
the gentlewoman is young; and therefore, if you
should deal double with her, truly it were an ill
thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very
weak dealing.
ROMEO  Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress.
I protest unto thee—
NURSE  Good heart, and i’ faith I will tell her as much.
Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
ROMEO  What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not
mark me.
NURSE  I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as
I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
ROMEO  Bid her devise
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,
And there she shall at Friar Lawrence’ cell
Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains.
Offering her money.
NURSE  No, truly, sir, not a penny.
ROMEO  Go to, I say you shall.
NURSE 
This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
ROMEO 
And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I’ll quit thy pains.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
NURSE 
Now, God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
ROMEO  What sayst thou, my dear nurse?
NURSE 
Is your man secret? Did you ne’er hear say
“Two may keep counsel, putting one away”?
ROMEO 
Warrant thee, my man’s as true as steel.
NURSE  Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord,
Lord, when ’twas a little prating thing—O, there is
a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain lay
knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a
toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her sometimes
and tell her that Paris is the properer man, but I’ll
warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any
clout in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and
Romeo begin both with a letter?
ROMEO  Ay, nurse, what of that? Both with an R.
NURSE  Ah, mocker, that’s the dog’s name. R is for
the—No, I know it begins with some other letter,
and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you
and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
ROMEO  Commend me to thy lady.
NURSE  Ay, a thousand times.—Peter.
PETER  Anon.
NURSE  Before and apace.
They
 exit.


Scene 5Enter Juliet.

JULIET 
The clock struck nine when I did send the Nurse.
In half an hour she promised to return.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That’s not so.
O, she is lame! Love’s heralds should be thoughts,
Which ten times faster glides than the sun’s beams,
Driving back shadows over louring hills.
Therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw Love,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Of this day’s journey, and from nine till twelve
Is three long hours, yet she is not come.
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And his to me.
But old folks, many feign as they were dead,
Unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.

Enter Nurse and Peter.

O God, she comes!—O, honey nurse, what news?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
NURSE  Peter, stay at the gate.Peter exits.
JULIET 
Now, good sweet nurse—O Lord, why lookest thou
sad?
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
NURSE 
I am aweary. Give me leave awhile.
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunt have I!
JULIET 
I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Nay, come, I pray thee, speak. Good, good nurse,
speak.
NURSE 
Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
JULIET 
How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Say either, and I’ll stay the circumstance.
Let me be satisfied; is ’t good or bad?
NURSE  Well, you have made a simple choice. You know
not how to choose a man. Romeo? No, not he.
Though his face be better than any man’s, yet his leg
excels all men’s, and for a hand and a foot and a
body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy,
but I’ll warrant him as gentle as a lamb. Go thy
ways, wench. Serve God. What, have you dined at
home?
JULIET 
No, no. But all this did I know before.
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
NURSE 
Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
My back o’ t’ other side! Ah, my back, my back!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To catch my death with jaunting up and down.
JULIET 
I’ faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my
love?
NURSE  Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a
courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I
warrant, a virtuous—Where is your mother?
JULIET 
Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest:
“Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Where is your mother?”
NURSE  O God’s lady dear,
Are you so hot? Marry, come up, I trow.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
JULIET 
Here’s such a coil. Come, what says Romeo?
NURSE 
Have you got leave to go to shrift today?
JULIET  I have.
NURSE 
Then hie you hence to Friar Lawrence’ cell.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks;
They’ll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Hie you to church. I must another way,
To fetch a ladder by the which your love
Must climb a bird’s nest soon when it is dark.
I am the drudge and toil in your delight,
But you shall bear the burden soon at night.
Go. I’ll to dinner. Hie you to the cell.
JULIET 
Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
They exit.


Scene 6Enter Friar Lawrence and Romeo.

FRIAR LAWRENCE 
So smile the heavens upon this holy act
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not.
ROMEO 
Amen, amen. But come what sorrow can,
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare,
It is enough I may but call her mine.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
These violent delights have violent ends
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Therefore love moderately. Long love doth so.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.

Enter Juliet.

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Will ne’er wear out the everlasting flint.
A lover may bestride the gossamers
That idles in the wanton summer air,
And yet not fall, so light is vanity.
JULIET 
Good even to my ghostly confessor.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
JULIET 
As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
ROMEO 
Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Be heaped like mine, and that thy skill be more
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
This neighbor air, and let rich music’s tongue
Unfold the imagined happiness that both
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
JULIET 
Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
They are but beggars that can count their worth,
But my true love is grown to such excess
I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Come, come with me, and we will make short work,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
They exit.




ACT 3
Scene 1Enter Mercutio, Benvolio, and their men.

BENVOLIO 
I pray thee, good Mercutio, let’s retire.
The day is hot, the Capels are abroad,
And if we meet we shall not ’scape a brawl,
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
MERCUTIO  Thou art like one of these fellows that, when
he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his
sword upon the table and says “God send me no
need of thee” and, by the operation of the second
cup, draws him on the drawer when indeed there is
no need.
BENVOLIO  Am I like such a fellow?
MERCUTIO  Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy
mood as any in Italy, and as soon moved to be
moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
BENVOLIO  And what to?
MERCUTIO  Nay, an there were two such, we should
have none shortly, for one would kill the other.
Thou—why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that
hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than
thou hast. Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking
nuts, having no other reason but because thou
hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye would spy
out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been
beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. Thou hast
quarreled with a man for coughing in the street
because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain
asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a tailor
for wearing his new doublet before Easter? With
another, for tying his new shoes with old ribbon?
And yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling?
BENVOLIO  An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any
man should buy the fee simple of my life for an
hour and a quarter.
MERCUTIO  The fee simple? O simple!

Enter Tybalt, Petruchio, and others.

BENVOLIO  By my head, here comes the Capulets.
MERCUTIO  By my heel, I care not.
TYBALT, to his companions 
Follow me close, for I will speak to them.—
Gentlemen, good e’en. A word with one of you.
MERCUTIO  And but one word with one of us? Couple it
with something. Make it a word and a blow.
TYBALT  You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an
you will give me occasion.
MERCUTIO  Could you not take some occasion without
giving?
TYBALT  Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
MERCUTIO  Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels?
An thou make minstrels of us, look to hear
nothing but discords. Here’s my fiddlestick; here’s
that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
BENVOLIO 
We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Either withdraw unto some private place,
Or reason coldly of your grievances,
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
MERCUTIO 
Men’s eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
I will not budge for no man’s pleasure, I.

Enter Romeo.

TYBALT 
Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
MERCUTIO 
But I’ll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery.
Marry, go before to field, he’ll be your follower.
Your Worship in that sense may call him “man.”
TYBALT 
Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
ROMEO 
Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
TYBALT 
Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
That thou hast done me. Therefore turn and draw.
ROMEO 
I do protest I never injured thee
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love.
And so, good Capulet, which name I tender
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
MERCUTIO 
O calm, dishonorable, vile submission!
Alla stoccato carries it away.He draws.
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
TYBALT  What wouldst thou have with me?
MERCUTIO  Good king of cats, nothing but one of your
nine lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and, as
you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the
eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher
by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your
ears ere it be out.
TYBALT  I am for you.He draws.
ROMEO 
Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
MERCUTIO  Come, sir, your passado.They fight.
ROMEO 
Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons.
Romeo draws.
Gentlemen, for shame forbear this outrage!
Tybalt! Mercutio! The Prince expressly hath
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Romeo attempts to beat down their rapiers.
Tybalt stabs Mercutio.
PETRUCHIO  Away, Tybalt!
Tybalt, Petruchio, and their followers exit.
MERCUTIO  I am hurt.
A plague o’ both houses! I am sped.
Is he gone and hath nothing?
BENVOLIO  What, art thou hurt?
MERCUTIO 
Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, ’tis enough.
Where is my page?—Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Page exits.
ROMEO 
Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much.
MERCUTIO  No, ’tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as
a church door, but ’tis enough. ’Twill serve. Ask for
me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I
am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o’
both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a
cat, to scratch a man to death! A braggart, a rogue, a
villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the
devil came you between us? I was hurt under your
arm.
ROMEO  I thought all for the best.
MERCUTIO 
Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Or I shall faint. A plague o’ both your houses!
They have made worms’ meat of me.
I have it, and soundly, too. Your houses!
All but Romeo exit.
ROMEO 
This gentleman, the Prince’s near ally,
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
In my behalf. My reputation stained
With Tybalt’s slander—Tybalt, that an hour
Hath been my cousin! O sweet Juliet,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
And in my temper softened valor’s steel.

Enter Benvolio.

BENVOLIO 
O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio is dead.
That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
ROMEO 
This day’s black fate on more days doth depend.
This but begins the woe others must end.

Enter Tybalt.

BENVOLIO 
Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
ROMEO 
Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven, respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now.—
Now, Tybalt, take the “villain” back again
That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio’s soul
Is but a little way above our heads,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
TYBALT 
Thou wretched boy that didst consort him here
Shalt with him hence.
ROMEO  This shall determine that.
They fight. Tybalt falls.
BENVOLIO 
Romeo, away, begone!
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Stand not amazed. The Prince will doom thee death
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away.
ROMEO 
O, I am Fortune’s fool!
BENVOLIO  Why dost thou stay?
Romeo exits.

Enter Citizens.

CITIZEN 
Which way ran he that killed Mercutio?
Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?
BENVOLIO 
There lies that Tybalt.
CITIZEN, to Tybalt  Up, sir, go with me.
I charge thee in the Prince’s name, obey.

Enter Prince, old Montague, Capulet, their Wives and all.

PRINCE 
Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
BENVOLIO 
O noble prince, I can discover all
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
LADY CAPULET 
Tybalt, my cousin, O my brother’s child!
O prince! O cousin! Husband! O, the blood is spilled
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague.
O cousin, cousin!
PRINCE 
Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
BENVOLIO 
Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo’s hand did slay—
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal
Your high displeasure. All this utterèd
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Of Tybalt, deaf to peace, but that he tilts
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio’s breast,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Cold death aside and with the other sends
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud
“Hold, friends! Friends, part!” and swifter than his
tongue
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And ’twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled.
But by and by comes back to Romeo,
Who had but newly entertained revenge,
And to ’t they go like lightning, for ere I
Could draw to part them was stout Tybalt slain,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
LADY CAPULET 
He is a kinsman to the Montague.
Affection makes him false; he speaks not true.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
PRINCE 
Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
MONTAGUE 
Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio’s friend.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
The life of Tybalt.
PRINCE  And for that offense
Immediately we do exile him hence.
I have an interest in your hearts’ proceeding:
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding.
But I’ll amerce you with so strong a fine
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses.
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Bear hence this body and attend our will.
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
They exit, the Capulet men
bearing off Tybalt’s body.



Scene 2Enter Juliet alone.

JULIET 
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus’ lodging. Such a wagoner
As Phaëton would whip you to the west
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
That runaways’ eyes may wink, and Romeo
Leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen.
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
By their own beauties, or, if love be blind,
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
Thou sober-suited matron all in black,
And learn me how to lose a winning match
Played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Hood my unmanned blood, bating in my cheeks,
With thy black mantle till strange love grow bold,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Come, night. Come, Romeo. Come, thou day in
night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Whiter than new snow upon a raven’s back.
Come, gentle night; come, loving black-browed
night,
Give me my Romeo, and when I shall die,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
That all the world will be in love with night
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love
But not possessed it, and, though I am sold,
Not yet enjoyed. So tedious is this day
As is the night before some festival
To an impatient child that hath new robes
And may not wear them.

Enter Nurse with cords.

O, here comes my nurse,
And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks
But Romeo’s name speaks heavenly eloquence.—
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? The
cords
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
NURSE  Ay, ay, the cords.
Dropping the rope ladder.
JULIET 
Ay me, what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands?
NURSE 
Ah weraday, he’s dead, he’s dead, he’s dead!
We are undone, lady, we are undone.
Alack the day, he’s gone, he’s killed, he’s dead.
JULIET 
Can heaven be so envious?
NURSE  Romeo can,
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo,
Whoever would have thought it? Romeo!
JULIET 
What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
This torture should be roared in dismal hell.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but “Ay,”
And that bare vowel “I” shall poison more
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
I am not I if there be such an “I,”
Or those eyes shut that makes thee answer “Ay.”
If he be slain, say “Ay,” or if not, “No.”
Brief sounds determine my weal or woe.
NURSE 
I saw the wound. I saw it with mine eyes
(God save the mark!) here on his manly breast—
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood,
All in gore blood. I swoonèd at the sight.
JULIET 
O break, my heart, poor bankrout, break at once!
To prison, eyes; ne’er look on liberty.
Vile earth to earth resign; end motion here,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier.
NURSE 
O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
O courteous Tybalt, honest gentleman,
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
JULIET 
What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Is Romeo slaughtered and is Tybalt dead?
My dearest cousin, and my dearer lord?
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom,
For who is living if those two are gone?
NURSE 
Tybalt is gone and Romeo banishèd.
Romeo that killed him—he is banishèd.
JULIET 
O God, did Romeo’s hand shed Tybalt’s blood?
NURSE 
It did, it did, alas the day, it did.
JULIET 
O serpent heart hid with a flow’ring face!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Beautiful tyrant, fiend angelical!
Dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb!
Despisèd substance of divinest show!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem’st,
A damnèd saint, an honorable villain.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
In such a gorgeous palace!
NURSE  There’s no trust,
No faith, no honesty in men. All perjured,
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Ah, where’s my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me
old.
Shame come to Romeo!
JULIET  Blistered be thy tongue
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,
For ’tis a throne where honor may be crowned
Sole monarch of the universal Earth.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
NURSE 
Will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
JULIET 
Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy
name
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
That villain cousin would have killed my husband.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring;
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,
And Tybalt’s dead, that would have slain my
husband.
All this is comfort. Wherefore weep I then?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt’s death,
That murdered me. I would forget it fain,
But, O, it presses to my memory
Like damnèd guilty deeds to sinners’ minds:
“Tybalt is dead and Romeo banishèd.”
That “banishèd,” that one word “banishèd,”
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt’s death
Was woe enough if it had ended there;
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
And needly will be ranked with other griefs,
Why followed not, when she said “Tybalt’s dead,”
“Thy father” or “thy mother,” nay, or both,
Which modern lamentation might have moved?
But with a rearward following Tybalt’s death,
“Romeo is banishèd.” To speak that word
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
All slain, all dead. “Romeo is banishèd.”
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In that word’s death. No words can that woe sound.
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
NURSE 
Weeping and wailing over Tybalt’s corse.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
JULIET 
Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be
spent,
When theirs are dry, for Romeo’s banishment.—
Take up those cords.
The Nurse picks up the rope ladder.
Poor ropes, you are beguiled,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled.
He made you for a highway to my bed,
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowèd.
Come, cords—come, nurse. I’ll to my wedding bed,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
NURSE 
Hie to your chamber. I’ll find Romeo
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Hark you, your Romeo will be here at night.
I’ll to him. He is hid at Lawrence’ cell.
JULIET 
O, find him!Giving the Nurse a ring.
Give this ring to my true knight
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
They
 exit.


Scene 3Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Affliction is enamored of thy parts,
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Enter Romeo.

ROMEO 
Father, what news? What is the Prince’s doom?
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
That I yet know not?
FRIAR LAWRENCE  Too familiar
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince’s doom.
ROMEO 
What less than doomsday is the Prince’s doom?
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
A gentler judgment vanished from his lips:
Not body’s death, but body’s banishment.
ROMEO 
Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say “death,”
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Much more than death. Do not say “banishment.”
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Here from Verona art thou banishèd.
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
ROMEO 
There is no world without Verona walls
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Hence “banishèd” is “banished from the world,”
And world’s exile is death. Then “banishèd”
Is death mistermed. Calling death “banishèd,”
Thou cutt’st my head off with a golden ax
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
O deadly sin, O rude unthankfulness!
Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince,
Taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law
And turned that black word “death” to
“banishment.”
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
ROMEO 
’Tis torture and not mercy. Heaven is here
Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Live here in heaven and may look on her,
But Romeo may not. More validity,
More honorable state, more courtship lives
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
On the white wonder of dear Juliet’s hand
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Who even in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
But Romeo may not; he is banishèd.
Flies may do this, but I from this must fly.
They are free men, but I am banishèd.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground
knife,
No sudden mean of death, though ne’er so mean,
But “banishèd” to kill me? “Banishèd”?
O friar, the damnèd use that word in hell.
Howling attends it. How hast thou the heart,
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
A sin absolver, and my friend professed,
To mangle me with that word “banishèd”?
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
ROMEO 
O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
I’ll give thee armor to keep off that word,
Adversity’s sweet milk, philosophy,
To comfort thee, though thou art banishèd.
ROMEO 
Yet “banishèd”? Hang up philosophy.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Displant a town, reverse a prince’s doom,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
ROMEO 
How should they when that wise men have no eyes?
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
ROMEO 
Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tybalt murderèd,
Doting like me, and like me banishèd,
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy
hair
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Romeo throws himself down.
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Knock within.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Arise. One knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
ROMEO 
Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Mistlike, enfold me from the search of eyes.
Knock.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Hark, how they knock!—Who’s there?—Romeo,
arise.
Thou wilt be taken.—Stay awhile.—Stand up.
Knock.
Run to my study.—By and by.—God’s will,
What simpleness is this?—I come, I come.
Knock.
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What’s
your will?
NURSE, within 
Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
I come from Lady Juliet.
FRIAR LAWRENCE, admitting the Nurse 
Welcome, then.

Enter Nurse.

NURSE 
O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,
Where’s my lady’s lord? Where’s Romeo?
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
There on the ground, with his own tears made
drunk.
NURSE 
O, he is even in my mistress’ case,
Just in her case. O woeful sympathy!
Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,
Blubb’ring and weeping, weeping and blubb’ring.—
Stand up, stand up. Stand an you be a man.
For Juliet’s sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?
ROMEO  Nurse.
NURSE 
Ah sir, ah sir, death’s the end of all.
ROMEO, rising up 
Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Doth not she think me an old murderer,
Now I have stained the childhood of our joy
With blood removed but little from her own?
Where is she? And how doth she? And what says
My concealed lady to our canceled love?
NURSE 
O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And “Tybalt” calls, and then on Romeo cries,
And then down falls again.
ROMEO  As if that name,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Did murder her, as that name’s cursèd hand
Murdered her kinsman.—O, tell me, friar, tell me,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
The hateful mansion.He draws his dagger.
FRIAR LAWRENCE  Hold thy desperate hand!
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art.
Thy tears are womanish; thy wild acts denote
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man,
And ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Thou hast amazed me. By my holy order,
I thought thy disposition better tempered.
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself,
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
By doing damnèd hate upon thyself?
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth,
Since birth and heaven and earth all three do meet
In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose?
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which, like a usurer, abound’st in all
And usest none in that true use indeed
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,
Digressing from the valor of a man;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Like powder in a skilless soldier’s flask,
Is set afire by thine own ignorance,
And thou dismembered with thine own defense.
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead:
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
But thou slewest Tybalt: there art thou happy.
The law that threatened death becomes thy friend
And turns it to exile: there art thou happy.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,
Thou pouts upon thy fortune and thy love.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed.
Ascend her chamber. Hence and comfort her.
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Than thou went’st forth in lamentation.—
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Romeo is coming.
NURSE 
O Lord, I could have stayed here all the night
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!—
My lord, I’ll tell my lady you will come.
ROMEO 
Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
NURSE 
Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Nurse gives Romeo a ring.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.
She exits.
ROMEO 
How well my comfort is revived by this!
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Go hence, good night—and here stands all your
state:
Either be gone before the watch be set
Or by the break of day disguised from hence.
Sojourn in Mantua. I’ll find out your man,
And he shall signify from time to time
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Give me thy hand. ’Tis late. Farewell. Good night.
ROMEO 
But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Farewell.
They exit.


Scene 4Enter old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.

CAPULET 
Things have fallen out, sir, so unluckily
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
’Tis very late. She’ll not come down tonight.
I promise you, but for your company,
I would have been abed an hour ago.
PARIS 
These times of woe afford no times to woo.—
Madam, good night. Commend me to your
daughter.
LADY CAPULET 
I will, and know her mind early tomorrow.
Tonight she’s mewed up to her heaviness.
CAPULET 
Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Of my child’s love. I think she will be ruled
In all respects by me. Nay, more, I doubt it not.—
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed.
Acquaint her here of my son Paris’ love,
And bid her—mark you me?—on Wednesday
next—
But soft, what day is this?
PARIS  Monday, my lord.
CAPULET 
Monday, ha ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
O’ Thursday let it be.—O’ Thursday, tell her,
She shall be married to this noble earl.—
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
We’ll keep no great ado: a friend or two.
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Therefore we’ll have some half a dozen friends,
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
PARIS 
My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
CAPULET 
Well, get you gone. O’ Thursday be it, then.
To Lady Capulet. Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.—
Farewell, my lord.—Light to my chamber, ho!—
Afore me, it is so very late that we
May call it early by and by.—Good night.
They exit.


Scene 5Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft.

JULIET 
Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
ROMEO 
It was the lark, the herald of the morn,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east.
Night’s candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain-tops.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
JULIET 
Yond light is not daylight, I know it, I.
It is some meteor that the sun exhaled
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
And light thee on thy way to Mantua.
Therefore stay yet. Thou need’st not to be gone.
ROMEO 
Let me be ta’en; let me be put to death.
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I’ll say yon gray is not the morning’s eye;
’Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia’s brow.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come death and welcome. Juliet wills it so.
How is ’t, my soul? Let’s talk. It is not day.
JULIET 
It is, it is. Hie hence, begone, away!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Some say the lark makes sweet division.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Some say the lark and loathèd toad changed eyes.
O, now I would they had changed voices too,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Hunting thee hence with hunt’s-up to the day.
O, now begone. More light and light it grows.
ROMEO 
More light and light, more dark and dark our woes.

Enter Nurse.

NURSE  Madam.
JULIET  Nurse?
NURSE 
Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
The day is broke; be wary; look about.She exits.
JULIET 
Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
ROMEO 
Farewell, farewell. One kiss and I’ll descend.
They kiss, and Romeo descends.
JULIET 
Art thou gone so? Love, lord, ay husband, friend!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
For in a minute there are many days.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Ere I again behold my Romeo.
ROMEO  Farewell.
I will omit no opportunity
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
JULIET 
O, think’st thou we shall ever meet again?
ROMEO 
I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For sweet discourses in our times to come.
JULIET 
O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Methinks I see thee, now thou art so low,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Either my eyesight fails or thou lookest pale.
ROMEO 
And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu.He exits.
JULIET 
O Fortune, Fortune, all men call thee fickle.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
That is renowned for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long,
But send him back.

Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET  Ho, daughter, are you up?
JULIET 
Who is ’t that calls? It is my lady mother.
Is she not down so late or up so early?
What unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
Juliet descends.
LADY CAPULET 
Why, how now, Juliet?
JULIET  Madam, I am not well.
LADY CAPULET 
Evermore weeping for your cousin’s death?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of
love,
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
JULIET 
Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
LADY CAPULET 
So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Which you weep for.
JULIET  Feeling so the loss,
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
LADY CAPULET 
Well, girl, thou weep’st not so much for his death
As that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
JULIET 
What villain, madam?
LADY CAPULET  That same villain, Romeo.
JULIET, aside 
Villain and he be many miles asunder.—
God pardon him. I do with all my heart,
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
LADY CAPULET 
That is because the traitor murderer lives.
JULIET 
Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Would none but I might venge my cousin’s death!
LADY CAPULET 
We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Then weep no more. I’ll send to one in Mantua,
Where that same banished runagate doth live,
Shall give him such an unaccustomed dram
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company.
And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
JULIET 
Indeed, I never shall be satisfied
With Romeo till I behold him—dead—
Is my poor heart, so for a kinsman vexed.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
To bear a poison, I would temper it,
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
To hear him named and cannot come to him
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Upon his body that hath slaughtered him.
LADY CAPULET 
Find thou the means, and I’ll find such a man.
But now I’ll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
JULIET 
And joy comes well in such a needy time.
What are they, beseech your Ladyship?
LADY CAPULET 
Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
That thou expects not, nor I looked not for.
JULIET 
Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
LADY CAPULET 
Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter’s Church
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
JULIET 
Now, by Saint Peter’s Church, and Peter too,
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,
I will not marry yet, and when I do I swear
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
LADY CAPULET 
Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
And see how he will take it at your hands.

Enter Capulet and Nurse.

CAPULET 
When the sun sets, the earth doth drizzle dew,
But for the sunset of my brother’s son
It rains downright.
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
Evermore show’ring? In one little body
Thou counterfeits a bark, a sea, a wind.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is,
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds thy sighs,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Without a sudden calm, will overset
Thy tempest-tossèd body.—How now, wife?
Have you delivered to her our decree?
LADY CAPULET 
Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.
I would the fool were married to her grave.
CAPULET 
Soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife.
How, will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blessed,
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
So worthy a gentleman to be her bride?
JULIET 
Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
CAPULET 
How, how, how, how? Chopped logic? What is this?
“Proud,” and “I thank you,” and “I thank you not,”
And yet “not proud”? Mistress minion you,
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
But fettle your fine joints ’gainst Thursday next
To go with Paris to Saint Peter’s Church,
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Out, you green-sickness carrion! Out, you baggage!
You tallow face!
LADY CAPULET  Fie, fie, what, are you mad?
JULIET, kneeling 
Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
CAPULET 
Hang thee, young baggage, disobedient wretch!
I tell thee what: get thee to church o’ Thursday,
Or never after look me in the face.
Speak not; reply not; do not answer me.
My fingers itch.—Wife, we scarce thought us
blessed
That God had lent us but this only child,
But now I see this one is one too much,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Out on her, hilding.
NURSE  God in heaven bless her!
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
CAPULET 
And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue.
Good Prudence, smatter with your gossips, go.
NURSE 
I speak no treason.
CAPULET  O, God ’i’ g’ eden!
NURSE 
May not one speak?
CAPULET  Peace, you mumbling fool!
Utter your gravity o’er a gossip’s bowl,
For here we need it not.
LADY CAPULET  You are too hot.
CAPULET  God’s bread, it makes me mad.
Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,
Alone, in company, still my care hath been
To have her matched. And having now provided
A gentleman of noble parentage,
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly ligned,
Stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts,
Proportioned as one’s thought would wish a man—
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
A whining mammet, in her fortune’s tender,
To answer “I’ll not wed. I cannot love.
I am too young. I pray you, pardon me.”
But, an you will not wed, I’ll pardon you!
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Look to ’t; think on ’t. I do not use to jest.
Thursday is near. Lay hand on heart; advise.
An you be mine, I’ll give you to my friend.
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
For, by my soul, I’ll ne’er acknowledge thee,
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Trust to ’t; bethink you. I’ll not be forsworn.
He exits.
JULIET 
Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
That sees into the bottom of my grief?—
O sweet my mother, cast me not away.
Delay this marriage for a month, a week,
Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
LADY CAPULET 
Talk not to me, for I’ll not speak a word.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.
She exits.
JULIET, rising 
O God! O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
My husband is on Earth, my faith in heaven.
How shall that faith return again to Earth
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By leaving Earth? Comfort me; counsel me.—
Alack, alack, that heaven should practice stratagems
Upon so soft a subject as myself.—
What sayst thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
Some comfort, nurse.
NURSE  Faith, here it is.
Romeo is banished, and all the world to nothing
That he dares ne’er come back to challenge you,
Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I think it best you married with the County.
O, he’s a lovely gentleman!
Romeo’s a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
I think you are happy in this second match,
For it excels your first, or, if it did not,
Your first is dead, or ’twere as good he were
As living here and you no use of him.
JULIET 
Speak’st thou from thy heart?
NURSE 
And from my soul too, else beshrew them both.
JULIET  Amen.
NURSE  What?
JULIET 
Well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much.
Go in and tell my lady I am gone,
Having displeased my father, to Lawrence’ cell
To make confession and to be absolved.
NURSE 
Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.She exits.
JULIET 
Ancient damnation, O most wicked fiend!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Which she hath praised him with above compare
So many thousand times? Go, counselor.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
I’ll to the Friar to know his remedy.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
She exits.



ACT 4
Scene 1Enter Friar Lawrence and County Paris.

FRIAR LAWRENCE 
On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
PARIS 
My father Capulet will have it so,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
You say you do not know the lady’s mind?
Uneven is the course. I like it not.
PARIS 
Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt’s death,
And therefore have I little talk of love,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
May be put from her by society.
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
FRIAR LAWRENCE, aside 
I would I knew not why it should be slowed.—
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

Enter Juliet.

PARIS 
Happily met, my lady and my wife.
JULIET 
That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
PARIS 
That “may be” must be, love, on Thursday next.
JULIET 
What must be shall be.
FRIAR LAWRENCE  That’s a certain text.
PARIS 
Come you to make confession to this father?
JULIET 
To answer that, I should confess to you.
PARIS 
Do not deny to him that you love me.
JULIET 
I will confess to you that I love him.
PARIS 
So will you, I am sure, that you love me.
JULIET 
If I do so, it will be of more price
Being spoke behind your back than to your face.
PARIS 
Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
JULIET 
The tears have got small victory by that,
For it was bad enough before their spite.
PARIS 
Thou wrong’st it more than tears with that report.
JULIET 
That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
PARIS 
Thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.
JULIET 
It may be so, for it is not mine own.—
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Or shall I come to you at evening Mass?
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.—
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
PARIS 
God shield I should disturb devotion!—
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse you.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.He exits.
JULIET 
O, shut the door, and when thou hast done so,
Come weep with me, past hope, past care, past help.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
O Juliet, I already know thy grief.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next be married to this County.
JULIET 
Tell me not, friar, that thou hearest of this,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Do thou but call my resolution wise,
And with this knife I’ll help it presently.
She shows him her knife.
God joined my heart and Romeo’s, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo’s sealed,
Shall be the label to another deed,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Therefore out of thy long-experienced time
Give me some present counsel, or, behold,
’Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that
Which the commission of thy years and art
Could to no issue of true honor bring.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
If what thou speak’st speak not of remedy.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Hold, daughter, I do spy a kind of hope,
Which craves as desperate an execution
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
If, rather than to marry County Paris,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
That cop’st with death himself to ’scape from it;
And if thou darest, I’ll give thee remedy.
JULIET 
O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
From off the battlements of any tower,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Where serpents are. Chain me with roaring bears,
Or hide me nightly in a charnel house,
O’ercovered quite with dead men’s rattling bones,
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud
(Things that to hear them told have made me
tremble),
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
To live an unstained wife to my sweet love.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Hold, then. Go home; be merry; give consent
To marry Paris. Wednesday is tomorrow.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Let not the Nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Holding out a vial.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And this distilling liquor drink thou off;
When presently through all thy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humor; for no pulse
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease.
No warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes’ windows fall
Like death when he shuts up the day of life.
Each part, deprived of supple government,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Thou shalt continue two and forty hours
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Then, as the manner of our country is,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
In the meantime, against thou shalt awake,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,
And hither shall he come, and he and I
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Abate thy valor in the acting it.
JULIET 
Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
FRIAR LAWRENCE, giving Juliet the vial 
Hold, get you gone. Be strong and prosperous
In this resolve. I’ll send a friar with speed
To Mantua with my letters to thy lord.
JULIET 
Love give me strength, and strength shall help
afford.
Farewell, dear father.
They exit in different directions.




Scene 2Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
two or three.

CAPULET 
So many guests invite as here are writ.
One or two of the Servingmen exit
with Capulet’s list.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
SERVINGMAN  You shall have none ill, sir, for I’ll try if
they can lick their fingers.
CAPULET  How canst thou try them so?
SERVINGMAN  Marry, sir, ’tis an ill cook that cannot lick
his own fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his
fingers goes not with me.
CAPULET  Go, begone.Servingman exits.
We shall be much unfurnished for this time.—
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Lawrence?
NURSE  Ay, forsooth.
CAPULET 
Well, he may chance to do some good on her.
A peevish self-willed harlotry it is.

Enter Juliet.

NURSE 
See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
CAPULET 
How now, my headstrong, where have you been
gadding?
JULIET 
Where I have learned me to repent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests, and am enjoined
By holy Lawrence to fall prostrate hereKneeling.
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you.
Henceforward I am ever ruled by you.
CAPULET 
Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
I’ll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
JULIET 
I met the youthful lord at Lawrence’ cell
And gave him what becomèd love I might,
Not stepping o’er the bounds of modesty.
CAPULET 
Why, I am glad on ’t. This is well. Stand up.
Juliet rises.
This is as ’t should be.—Let me see the County.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.—
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
All our whole city is much bound to him.
JULIET 
Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
To help me sort such needful ornaments
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
LADY CAPULET 
No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
CAPULET 
Go, nurse. Go with her. We’ll to church tomorrow.
Juliet and the Nurse exit.
LADY CAPULET 
We shall be short in our provision.
’Tis now near night.
CAPULET  Tush, I will stir about,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Go thou to Juliet. Help to deck up her.
I’ll not to bed tonight. Let me alone.
I’ll play the housewife for this once.—What ho!—
They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, to prepare up him
Against tomorrow. My heart is wondrous light
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaimed.
They
 exit.



Scene 3Enter Juliet and Nurse.

JULIET 
Ay, those attires are best. But, gentle nurse,
I pray thee leave me to myself tonight,
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET 
What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
JULIET 
No, madam, we have culled such necessaries
As are behooveful for our state tomorrow.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
And let the Nurse this night sit up with you,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
In this so sudden business.
LADY CAPULET  Good night.
Get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
Lady Capulet and the Nurse exit.
JULIET 
Farewell.—God knows when we shall meet again.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
I’ll call them back again to comfort me.—
Nurse!—What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Come, vial.She takes out the vial.
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Shall I be married then tomorrow morning?
She takes out her knife
and puts it down beside her.
No, no, this shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
What if it be a poison which the Friar
Subtly hath ministered to have me dead,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonored
Because he married me before to Romeo?
I fear it is. And yet methinks it should not,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
I wake before the time that Romeo
Come to redeem me? There’s a fearful point.
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it not very like
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Together with the terror of the place—
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Of all my buried ancestors are packed;
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Lies fest’ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the night spirits resort—
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
So early waking, what with loathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad—
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Environèd with all these hideous fears,
And madly play with my forefathers’ joints,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman’s bone,
As with a club, dash out my desp’rate brains?
O look, methinks I see my cousin’s ghost
Seeking out Romeo that did spit his body
Upon a rapier’s point! Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, Romeo, Romeo! Here’s drink. I drink to
thee.She drinks and falls upon her bed
within the curtains.




Scene 4Enter Lady Capulet and Nurse.

LADY CAPULET 
Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
NURSE 
They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

Enter old Capulet.

CAPULET 
Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crowed.
The curfew bell hath rung. ’Tis three o’clock.—
Look to the baked meats, good Angelica.
Spare not for cost.
NURSE  Go, you cot-quean, go,
Get you to bed. Faith, you’ll be sick tomorrow
For this night’s watching.
CAPULET 
No, not a whit. What, I have watched ere now
All night for lesser cause, and ne’er been sick.
LADY CAPULET 
Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
Lady Capulet and Nurse exit.
CAPULET 
A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

Enter three or four Servingmen with spits and logs
and baskets.

Now fellow,
What is there?
FIRST SERVINGMAN 
Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what.
CAPULET 
Make haste, make haste.First Servingman exits.
Sirrah, fetch drier logs.
Call Peter. He will show thee where they are.
SECOND SERVINGMAN 
I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
CAPULET 
Mass, and well said. A merry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be loggerhead.
Second Servingman exits.
Good faith, ’tis day.
The County will be here with music straight,
Play music.
For so he said he would. I hear him near.—
Nurse!—Wife! What ho!—What, nurse, I say!

Enter Nurse.

Go waken Juliet. Go and trim her up.
I’ll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Make haste. The bridegroom he is come already.
Make haste, I say.
He exits.



Scene 5
NURSE, approaching the bed 
Mistress! What, mistress! Juliet!—Fast, I warrant
her, she—
Why, lamb, why, lady! Fie, you slugabed!
Why, love, I say! Madam! Sweetheart! Why, bride!—
What, not a word?—You take your pennyworths
now.
Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That you shall rest but little.—God forgive me,
Marry, and amen! How sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her.—Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the County take you in your bed,
He’ll fright you up, i’ faith.—Will it not be?
She opens the bed’s curtains.
What, dressed, and in your clothes, and down
again?
I must needs wake you. Lady, lady, lady!—
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady’s dead.—
O, weraday, that ever I was born!—
Some aqua vitae, ho!—My lord! My lady!

Enter Lady Capulet.

LADY CAPULET 
What noise is here?
NURSE  O lamentable day!
LADY CAPULET 
What is the matter?
NURSE  Look, look!—O heavy day!
LADY CAPULET 
O me! O me! My child, my only life,
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee.
Help, help! Call help.

Enter Capulet.

CAPULET 
For shame, bring Juliet forth. Her lord is come.
NURSE 
She’s dead, deceased. She’s dead, alack the day!
LADY CAPULET 
Alack the day, she’s dead, she’s dead, she’s dead.
CAPULET 
Ha, let me see her! Out, alas, she’s cold.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
NURSE 
O lamentable day!
LADY CAPULET  O woeful time!
CAPULET 
Death, that hath ta’en her hence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

Enter Friar Lawrence and the County Paris, with
Musicians.

FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
CAPULET 
Ready to go, but never to return.—
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,
Flower as she was, deflowerèd by him.
Death is my son-in-law; Death is my heir.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death’s.
PARIS 
Have I thought long to see this morning’s face,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
LADY CAPULET 
Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour that e’er time saw
In lasting labor of his pilgrimage!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
And cruel death hath catched it from my sight!
NURSE 
O woe, O woeful, woeful, woeful day!
Most lamentable day, most woeful day
That ever, ever I did yet behold!
O day, O day, O day, O hateful day!
Never was seen so black a day as this!
O woeful day, O woeful day!
PARIS 
Beguiled, divorcèd, wrongèd, spited, slain!
Most detestable death, by thee beguiled,
By cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown!
O love! O life! Not life, but love in death!
CAPULET 
Despised, distressèd, hated, martyred, killed!
Uncomfortable time, why cam’st thou now
To murder, murder our solemnity?
O child! O child! My soul and not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack, my child is dead,
And with my child my joys are burièd.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion’s cure lives not
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fair maid. Now heaven hath all,
And all the better is it for the maid.
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
The most you sought was her promotion,
For ’twas your heaven she should be advanced;
And weep you now, seeing she is advanced
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
O, in this love you love your child so ill
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
She’s not well married that lives married long,
But she’s best married that dies married young.
Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
And in her best array, bear her to church,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Yet nature’s tears are reason’s merriment.
CAPULET 
All things that we ordainèd festival
Turn from their office to black funeral:
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,
And all things change them to the contrary.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,
And go, Sir Paris. Everyone prepare
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
The heavens do lour upon you for some ill.
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
All but the Nurse and the Musicians exit.
FIRST MUSICIAN 
Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
NURSE 
Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up,
For, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
FIRST MUSICIAN 
Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Nurse exits.

Enter Peter.

PETER  Musicians, O musicians, “Heart’s ease,”
“Heart’s ease.” O, an you will have me live, play
“Heart’s ease.”
FIRST MUSICIAN  Why “Heart’s ease?”
PETER  O musicians, because my heart itself plays “My
heart is full.” O, play me some merry dump to
comfort me.
FIRST MUSICIAN  Not a dump, we. ’Tis no time to play
now.
PETER  You will not then?
FIRST MUSICIAN  No.
PETER  I will then give it you soundly.
FIRST MUSICIAN  What will you give us?
PETER  No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give
you the minstrel.
FIRST MUSICIAN  Then will I give you the
serving-creature.
PETER  Then will I lay the serving-creature’s dagger on
your pate. I will carry no crochets. I’ll re you, I’ll fa
you. Do you note me?
FIRST MUSICIAN  An you re us and fa us, you note us.
SECOND MUSICIAN  Pray you, put up your dagger and
put out your wit.
PETER  Then have at you with my wit. I will dry-beat
you with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger.
Answer me like men.
 When griping griefs the heart doth wound
 And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
 Then music with her silver sound—
Why “silver sound”? Why “music with her silver
sound”? What say you, Simon Catling?
FIRST MUSICIAN  Marry, sir, because silver hath a
sweet sound.
PETER  Prates.—What say you, Hugh Rebeck?
SECOND MUSICIAN  I say “silver sound” because musicians
sound for silver.
PETER  Prates too.—What say you, James Soundpost?
THIRD MUSICIAN  Faith, I know not what to say.
PETER  O, I cry you mercy. You are the singer. I will say
for you. It is “music with her silver sound” because
musicians have no gold for sounding:
 Then music with her silver sound
 With speedy help doth lend redress.
He exits.
FIRST MUSICIAN  What a pestilent knave is this same!
SECOND MUSICIAN  Hang him, Jack. Come, we’ll in
here, tarry for the mourners, and stay dinner.
They
 exit.



ACT 5
Scene 1Enter Romeo.

ROMEO 
If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My bosom’s lord sits lightly in his throne,
And all this day an unaccustomed spirit
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to
think!)
And breathed such life with kisses in my lips
That I revived and was an emperor.
Ah me, how sweet is love itself possessed
When but love’s shadows are so rich in joy!

Enter Romeo’s man Balthasar, in riding boots.

News from Verona!—How now, Balthasar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the Friar?
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How doth my Juliet? That I ask again,
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
BALTHASAR 
Then she is well and nothing can be ill.
Her body sleeps in Capels’ monument,
And her immortal part with angels lives.
I saw her laid low in her kindred’s vault
And presently took post to tell it you.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
ROMEO 
Is it e’en so?—Then I deny you, stars!—
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper,
And hire post-horses. I will hence tonight.
BALTHASAR 
I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Some misadventure.
ROMEO  Tush, thou art deceived.
Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do.
Hast thou no letters to me from the Friar?
BALTHASAR 
No, my good lord.
ROMEO  No matter. Get thee gone,
And hire those horses. I’ll be with thee straight.
Balthasar exits.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee tonight.
Let’s see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men.
I do remember an apothecary
(And hereabouts he dwells) which late I noted
In tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows,
Culling of simples. Meager were his looks.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An alligator stuffed, and other skins
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Were thinly scattered to make up a show.
Noting this penury, to myself I said
“An if a man did need a poison now,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.”
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Being holiday, the beggar’s shop is shut.—
What ho, Apothecary!

Enter Apothecary.

APOTHECARY  Who calls so loud?
ROMEO 
Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
He offers money.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
As will disperse itself through all the veins,
That the life-weary taker may fall dead,
And that the trunk may be discharged of breath
As violently as hasty powder fired
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon’s womb.
APOTHECARY 
Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua’s law
Is death to any he that utters them.
ROMEO 
Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Need and oppression starveth in thy eyes,
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world’s law.
The world affords no law to make thee rich.
Then be not poor, but break it, and take this.
APOTHECARY 
My poverty, but not my will, consents.
ROMEO 
I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
APOTHECARY, giving him the poison 
Put this in any liquid thing you will
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
ROMEO, handing him the money 
There is thy gold, worse poison to men’s souls,
Doing more murder in this loathsome world
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not
sell.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
Farewell, buy food, and get thyself in flesh.
Apothecary exits.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
To Juliet’s grave, for there must I use thee.
He exits.



Scene 2Enter Friar John.

FRIAR JOHN 
Holy Franciscan friar, brother, ho!

Enter Friar Lawrence.

FRIAR LAWRENCE 
This same should be the voice of Friar John.—
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
FRIAR JOHN 
Going to find a barefoot brother out,
One of our order, to associate me,
Here in this city visiting the sick,
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Sealed up the doors and would not let us forth,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stayed.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
FRIAR JOHN 
I could not send it—here it is again—
Returning the letter.
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
So fearful were they of infection.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
The letter was not nice but full of charge,
Of dear import, and the neglecting it
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Unto my cell.
FRIAR JOHN 
Brother, I’ll go and bring it thee.He exits.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Now must I to the monument alone.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Hath had no notice of these accidents.
But I will write again to Mantua,
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come.
Poor living corse, closed in a dead man’s tomb!
He exits.


Scene 3Enter Paris and his Page.

PARIS 
Give me thy torch, boy. Hence and stand aloof.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Under yond yew trees lay thee all along,
Holding thy ear close to the hollow ground.
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me
As signal that thou hearest something approach.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee. Go.
PAGE, aside 
I am almost afraid to stand alone
Here in the churchyard. Yet I will adventure.
He moves away from Paris.
PARIS, scattering flowers 
Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew
(O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones!)
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
Page whistles.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
What cursèd foot wanders this way tonight,
To cross my obsequies and true love’s rite?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
He steps aside.

Enter Romeo and Balthasar.

ROMEO 
Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Whate’er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Why I descend into this bed of death
Is partly to behold my lady’s face,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
A precious ring, a ring that I must use
In dear employment. Therefore hence, begone.
But, if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
In what I farther shall intend to do,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
More fierce and more inexorable far
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
BALTHASAR 
I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
ROMEO 
So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Giving money.
Live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
BALTHASAR, aside 
For all this same, I’ll hide me hereabout.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt.
He steps aside.
ROMEO, beginning to force open the tomb 
Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And in despite I’ll cram thee with more food.
PARIS 
This is that banished haughty Montague
That murdered my love’s cousin, with which grief
It is supposèd the fair creature died,
And here is come to do some villainous shame
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
Stepping forward.
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague.
Can vengeance be pursued further than death?
Condemnèd villain, I do apprehend thee.
Obey and go with me, for thou must die.
ROMEO 
I must indeed, and therefore came I hither.
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp’rate man.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Put not another sin upon my head
By urging me to fury. O, begone!
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
For I come hither armed against myself.
Stay not, begone, live, and hereafter say
A madman’s mercy bid thee run away.
PARIS 
I do defy thy commination
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
ROMEO 
Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
They draw and fight.
PAGE 
O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch.
He exits.
PARIS 
O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Open the tomb; lay me with Juliet.He dies.
ROMEO 
In faith, I will.—Let me peruse this face.
Mercutio’s kinsman, noble County Paris!
What said my man when my betossèd soul
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Said he not so? Or did I dream it so?
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,
To think it was so?—O, give me thy hand,
One writ with me in sour misfortune’s book!
I’ll bury thee in a triumphant grave.—
He opens the tomb.
A grave? O, no. A lantern, slaughtered youth,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
This vault a feasting presence full of light.—
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interred.
Laying Paris in the tomb.
How oft when men are at the point of death
Have they been merry, which their keepers call
A light’ning before death! O, how may I
Call this a light’ning?—O my love, my wife,
Death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Thou art not conquered. Beauty’s ensign yet
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And death’s pale flag is not advancèd there.—
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
O, what more favor can I do to thee
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Forgive me, cousin.—Ah, dear Juliet,
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
That unsubstantial death is amorous,
And that the lean abhorrèd monster keeps
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
And never from this palace of dim night
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Will I set up my everlasting rest
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
From this world-wearied flesh! Eyes, look your last.
Arms, take your last embrace. And, lips, O, you
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
A dateless bargain to engrossing death.
Kissing Juliet.
Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavory guide!
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Here’s to my love. Drinking. O true apothecary,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die.
He dies.

Enter Friar Lawrence with lantern, crow, and spade.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Saint Francis be my speed! How oft tonight
Have my old feet stumbled at graves!—Who’s there?
BALTHASAR 
Here’s one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Bliss be upon you. Tell me, good my friend,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
It burneth in the Capels’ monument.
BALTHASAR 
It doth so, holy sir, and there’s my master,
One that you love.
FRIAR LAWRENCE  Who is it?
BALTHASAR  Romeo.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
How long hath he been there?
BALTHASAR  Full half an hour.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Go with me to the vault.
BALTHASAR  I dare not, sir.
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
And fearfully did menace me with death
If I did stay to look on his intents.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
Stay, then. I’ll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
BALTHASAR 
As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
I dreamt my master and another fought,
And that my master slew him.
FRIAR LAWRENCE, moving toward the tomb 
Romeo!—
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
The stony entrance of this sepulcher?
What mean these masterless and gory swords
To lie discolored by this place of peace?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
And steeped in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
Is guilty of this lamentable chance!
The lady stirs.
JULIET 
O comfortable friar, where is my lord?
I do remember well where I should be,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
I hear some noise.—Lady, come from that nest
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,
And Paris, too. Come, I’ll dispose of thee
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Stay not to question, for the watch is coming.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
JULIET 
Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
He exits.
What’s here? A cup closed in my true love’s hand?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.—
O churl, drunk all, and left no friendly drop
To help me after! I will kiss thy lips.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,
To make me die with a restorative.She kisses him.
Thy lips are warm!

Enter Paris’s Page and Watch.

FIRST WATCH  Lead, boy. Which way?
JULIET 
Yea, noise? Then I’ll be brief. O, happy dagger,
This is thy sheath. There rust, and let me die.
She takes Romeo’s dagger, stabs herself, and dies.
PAGE 
This is the place, there where the torch doth burn.
FIRST WATCH 
The ground is bloody.—Search about the
churchyard.
Go, some of you; whoe’er you find, attach.
Some watchmen exit.
Pitiful sight! Here lies the County slain,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Who here hath lain this two days burièd.—
Go, tell the Prince. Run to the Capulets.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
Others exit.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
We cannot without circumstance descry.

Enter Watchmen with Romeo’s man Balthasar.

SECOND WATCH 
Here’s Romeo’s man. We found him in the
churchyard.
FIRST WATCH 
Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

Enter Friar Lawrence and another Watchman.

THIRD WATCH 
Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
As he was coming from this churchyard’s side.
FIRST WATCH 
A great suspicion. Stay the Friar too.

Enter the Prince with Attendants.

PRINCE 
What misadventure is so early up
That calls our person from our morning rest?
Enter Capulet and Lady Capulet.

CAPULET 
What should it be that is so shrieked abroad?
LADY CAPULET 
O, the people in the street cry “Romeo,”
Some “Juliet,” and some “Paris,” and all run
With open outcry toward our monument.
PRINCE 
What fear is this which startles in our ears?
FIRST WATCH 
Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,
And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,
Warm and new killed.
PRINCE 
Search, seek, and know how this foul murder
comes.
FIRST WATCH 
Here is a friar, and slaughtered Romeo’s man,
With instruments upon them fit to open
These dead men’s tombs.
CAPULET 
O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
This dagger hath mista’en, for, lo, his house
Is empty on the back of Montague,
And it mis-sheathèd in my daughter’s bosom.
LADY CAPULET 
O me, this sight of death is as a bell
That warns my old age to a sepulcher.

Enter Montague.

PRINCE 
Come, Montague, for thou art early up
To see thy son and heir now early down.
MONTAGUE 
Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight.
Grief of my son’s exile hath stopped her breath.
What further woe conspires against mine age?
PRINCE  Look, and thou shalt see.
MONTAGUE, seeing Romeo dead 
O thou untaught! What manners is in this,
To press before thy father to a grave?
PRINCE 
Seal up the mouth of outrage for awhile,
Till we can clear these ambiguities
And know their spring, their head, their true
descent,
And then will I be general of your woes
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And let mischance be slave to patience.—
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
I am the greatest, able to do least,
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Doth make against me, of this direful murder.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Myself condemnèd and myself excused.
PRINCE 
Then say at once what thou dost know in this.
FRIAR LAWRENCE 
I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,
And she, there dead, that Romeo’s faithful wife.
I married them, and their stol’n marriage day
Was Tybalt’s doomsday, whose untimely death
Banished the new-made bridegroom from this city,
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Betrothed and would have married her perforce
To County Paris. Then comes she to me,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
To rid her from this second marriage,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Then gave I her (so tutored by my art)
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
As I intended, for it wrought on her
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
That he should hither come as this dire night
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Being the time the potion’s force should cease.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Was stayed by accident, and yesternight
Returned my letter back. Then all alone
At the prefixèd hour of her waking
Came I to take her from her kindred’s vault,
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Of her awakening, here untimely lay
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
She wakes, and I entreated her come forth
And bear this work of heaven with patience.
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
All this I know, and to the marriage
Her nurse is privy. And if aught in this
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Be sacrificed some hour before his time
Unto the rigor of severest law.
PRINCE 
We still have known thee for a holy man.—
Where’s Romeo’s man? What can he say to this?
BALTHASAR 
I brought my master news of Juliet’s death,
And then in post he came from Mantua
To this same place, to this same monument.
This letter he early bid me give his father
And threatened me with death, going in the vault,
If I departed not and left him there.
PRINCE 
Give me the letter. I will look on it.—
He takes Romeo’s letter.
Where is the County’s page, that raised the
watch?—
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
PAGE 
He came with flowers to strew his lady’s grave
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,
And by and by my master drew on him,
And then I ran away to call the watch.
PRINCE 
This letter doth make good the Friar’s words,
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Of a poor ’pothecary, and therewithal
Came to this vault to die and lie with Juliet.
Where be these enemies?—Capulet, Montague,
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love,
And I, for winking at your discords too,
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punished.
CAPULET 
O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
This is my daughter’s jointure, for no more
Can I demand.
MONTAGUE  But I can give thee more,
For I will ray her statue in pure gold,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
CAPULET 
As rich shall Romeo’s by his lady’s lie,
Poor sacrifices of our enmity.
PRINCE 
A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
Go hence to have more talk of these sad things.
Some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd.
For never was a story of more woe
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
All exit.





Synopsis:

Macbeth, set primarily in Scotland, mixes witchcraft, prophecy, and murder. Three “Weïrd Sisters” appear to Macbeth and his comrade Banquo after a battle and prophesy that Macbeth will be king and that the descendants of Banquo will also reign. When Macbeth arrives at his castle, he and Lady Macbeth plot to assassinate King Duncan, soon to be their guest, so that Macbeth can become king.

After Macbeth murders Duncan, the king’s two sons flee, and Macbeth is crowned. Fearing that Banquo’s descendants will, according to the Weïrd Sisters’ predictions, take over the kingdom, Macbeth has Banquo killed. At a royal banquet that evening, Macbeth sees Banquo’s ghost appear covered in blood. Macbeth determines to consult the Weïrd Sisters again. They comfort him with ambiguous promises.

Another nobleman, Macduff, rides to England to join Duncan’s older son, Malcolm. Macbeth has Macduff’s wife and children murdered. Malcolm and Macduff lead an army against Macbeth, as Lady Macbeth goes mad and commits suicide.

Macbeth confronts Malcolm’s army, trusting in the Weïrd Sisters’ comforting promises. He learns that the promises are tricks, but continues to fight. Macduff kills Macbeth and Malcolm becomes Scotland’s king.

ACT 1
Scene 1
Thunder and Lightning. Enter three Witches.

FIRST WITCH 
When shall we three meet again?
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
SECOND WITCH 
When the hurly-burly’s done,
When the battle’s lost and won.
THIRD WITCH 
That will be ere the set of sun.
FIRST WITCH 
Where the place?
SECOND WITCH  Upon the heath.
THIRD WITCH 
There to meet with Macbeth.
FIRST WITCH  I come, Graymalkin.
SECOND WITCH  Paddock calls.
THIRD WITCH  Anon.
ALL 
Fair is foul, and foul is fair;
Hover through the fog and filthy air.
They exit.



Scene 2
Alarum within. Enter King Duncan, Malcolm,
Donalbain, Lennox, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding
Captain.

DUNCAN 
What bloody man is that? He can report,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
The newest state.
MALCOLM  This is the sergeant
Who, like a good and hardy soldier, fought
’Gainst my captivity.—Hail, brave friend!
Say to the King the knowledge of the broil
As thou didst leave it.
CAPTAIN  Doubtful it stood,
As two spent swimmers that do cling together
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald
(Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
The multiplying villainies of nature
Do swarm upon him) from the Western Isles
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
And Fortune, on his damnèd quarrel smiling,
Showed like a rebel’s whore. But all’s too weak;
For brave Macbeth (well he deserves that name),
Disdaining Fortune, with his brandished steel,
Which smoked with bloody execution,
Like Valor’s minion, carved out his passage
Till he faced the slave;
Which ne’er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Till he unseamed him from the nave to th’ chops,
And fixed his head upon our battlements.
DUNCAN 
O valiant cousin, worthy gentleman!
CAPTAIN 
As whence the sun ’gins his reflection
Shipwracking storms and direful thunders break,
So from that spring whence comfort seemed to
come
Discomfort swells. Mark, King of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had, with valor armed,
Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
But the Norweyan lord, surveying vantage,
With furbished arms and new supplies of men,
Began a fresh assault.
DUNCAN 
Dismayed not this our captains, Macbeth and
Banquo?
CAPTAIN 
Yes, as sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As cannons overcharged with double cracks,
So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe.
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds
Or memorize another Golgotha,
I cannot tell—
But I am faint. My gashes cry for help.
DUNCAN 
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds:
They smack of honor both.—Go, get him surgeons.
The Captain is led off by Attendants.

Enter Ross and Angus.

Who comes here?
MALCOLM  The worthy Thane of Ross.
LENNOX 
What a haste looks through his eyes!
So should he look that seems to speak things
strange.
ROSS  God save the King.
DUNCAN  Whence cam’st thou, worthy thane?
ROSS  From Fife, great king,
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
And fan our people cold.
Norway himself, with terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor,
The Thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict,
Till that Bellona’s bridegroom, lapped in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point, rebellious arm ’gainst arm,
Curbing his lavish spirit. And to conclude,
The victory fell on us.
DUNCAN  Great happiness!
ROSS  That now Sweno,
The Norways’ king, craves composition.
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Till he disbursèd at Saint Colme’s Inch
Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
DUNCAN 
No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest. Go, pronounce his present
death,
And with his former title greet Macbeth.
ROSS  I’ll see it done.
DUNCAN 
What he hath lost, noble Macbeth hath won.
They exit.


Scene 3
Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

FIRST WITCH 
Where hast thou been, sister?
SECOND WITCH  Killing swine.
THIRD WITCH  Sister, where thou?
FIRST WITCH 
A sailor’s wife had chestnuts in her lap
And munched and munched and munched. “Give
me,” quoth I.
“Aroint thee, witch,” the rump-fed runnion cries.
Her husband’s to Aleppo gone, master o’ th’ Tiger;
But in a sieve I’ll thither sail,
And, like a rat without a tail,
I’ll do, I’ll do, and I’ll do.
SECOND WITCH 
I’ll give thee a wind.
FIRST WITCH 
Th’ art kind.
THIRD WITCH 
And I another.
FIRST WITCH 
I myself have all the other,
And the very ports they blow;
All the quarters that they know
I’ th’ shipman’s card.
I’ll drain him dry as hay.
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his penthouse lid.
He shall live a man forbid.
Weary sev’nnights, nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, peak, and pine.
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be tempest-tossed.
Look what I have.
SECOND WITCH  Show me, show me.
FIRST WITCH 
Here I have a pilot’s thumb,
Wracked as homeward he did come.Drum within.
THIRD WITCH 
A drum, a drum!
Macbeth doth come.
ALL, dancing in a circle 
The Weïrd Sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the sea and land,
Thus do go about, about,
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace, the charm’s wound up.

Enter Macbeth and Banquo.

MACBETH 
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
BANQUO 
How far is ’t called to Forres?—What are these,
So withered, and so wild in their attire,
That look not like th’ inhabitants o’ th’ Earth
And yet are on ’t?—Live you? Or are you aught
That man may question? You seem to understand
me
By each at once her choppy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips. You should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.
MACBETH  Speak if you can. What are you?
FIRST WITCH 
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Glamis!
SECOND WITCH 
All hail, Macbeth! Hail to thee, Thane of Cawdor!
THIRD WITCH 
All hail, Macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!
BANQUO 
Good sir, why do you start and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair?—I’ th’ name of truth,
Are you fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly you show? My noble partner
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Of noble having and of royal hope,
That he seems rapt withal. To me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of time
And say which grain will grow and which will not,
Speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favors nor your hate.
FIRST WITCH  Hail!
SECOND WITCH  Hail!
THIRD WITCH  Hail!
FIRST WITCH 
Lesser than Macbeth and greater.
SECOND WITCH 
Not so happy, yet much happier.
THIRD WITCH 
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none.
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
FIRST WITCH 
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
MACBETH 
Stay, you imperfect speakers. Tell me more.
By Sinel’s death I know I am Thane of Glamis.
But how of Cawdor? The Thane of Cawdor lives
A prosperous gentleman, and to be king
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange intelligence or why
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting. Speak, I charge you.
Witches vanish.
BANQUO 
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
And these are of them. Whither are they vanished?
MACBETH 
Into the air, and what seemed corporal melted,
As breath into the wind. Would they had stayed!
BANQUO 
Were such things here as we do speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane root
That takes the reason prisoner?
MACBETH 
Your children shall be kings.
BANQUO  You shall be king.
MACBETH 
And Thane of Cawdor too. Went it not so?
BANQUO 
To th’ selfsame tune and words.—Who’s here?

Enter Ross and Angus.

ROSS 
The King hath happily received, Macbeth,
The news of thy success, and, when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebels’ fight,
His wonders and his praises do contend
Which should be thine or his. Silenced with that,
In viewing o’er the rest o’ th’ selfsame day
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Strange images of death. As thick as tale
Came post with post, and every one did bear
Thy praises in his kingdom’s great defense,
And poured them down before him.
ANGUS  We are sent
To give thee from our royal master thanks,
Only to herald thee into his sight,
Not pay thee.
ROSS 
And for an earnest of a greater honor,
He bade me, from him, call thee Thane of Cawdor,
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane,
For it is thine.
BANQUO  What, can the devil speak true?
MACBETH 
The Thane of Cawdor lives. Why do you dress me
In borrowed robes?
ANGUS  Who was the Thane lives yet,
But under heavy judgment bears that life
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was
combined
With those of Norway, or did line the rebel
With hidden help and vantage, or that with both
He labored in his country’s wrack, I know not;
But treasons capital, confessed and proved,
Have overthrown him.
MACBETH, aside  Glamis and Thane of Cawdor!
The greatest is behind. To Ross and Angus. Thanks
for your pains.
Aside to Banquo. Do you not hope your children
shall be kings,
When those that gave the Thane of Cawdor to me
Promised no less to them?
BANQUO  That, trusted home,
Might yet enkindle you unto the crown,
Besides the Thane of Cawdor. But ’tis strange.
And oftentimes, to win us to our harm,
The instruments of darkness tell us truths,
Win us with honest trifles, to betray ’s
In deepest consequence.—
Cousins, a word, I pray you.They step aside.
MACBETH, aside  Two truths are told
As happy prologues to the swelling act
Of the imperial theme.—I thank you, gentlemen.
Aside. This supernatural soliciting
Cannot be ill, cannot be good. If ill,
Why hath it given me earnest of success
Commencing in a truth? I am Thane of Cawdor.
If good, why do I yield to that suggestion
Whose horrid image doth unfix my hair
And make my seated heart knock at my ribs
Against the use of nature? Present fears
Are less than horrible imaginings.
My thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical,
Shakes so my single state of man
That function is smothered in surmise,
And nothing is but what is not.
BANQUO  Look how our partner’s rapt.
MACBETH, aside 
If chance will have me king, why, chance may
crown me
Without my stir.
BANQUO  New honors come upon him,
Like our strange garments, cleave not to their mold
But with the aid of use.
MACBETH, aside  Come what come may,
Time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
BANQUO 
Worthy Macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
MACBETH 
Give me your favor. My dull brain was wrought
With things forgotten. Kind gentlemen, your pains
Are registered where every day I turn
The leaf to read them. Let us toward the King.
Aside to Banquo. Think upon what hath chanced,
and at more time,
The interim having weighed it, let us speak
Our free hearts each to other.
BANQUO  Very gladly.
MACBETH 
Till then, enough.—Come, friends.
They exit.


Scene 4
Flourish. Enter King 
Duncan, Lennox, Malcolm,
Donalbain, and Attendants.

DUNCAN 
Is execution done on Cawdor? Are not
Those in commission yet returned?
MALCOLM  My liege,
They are not yet come back. But I have spoke
With one that saw him die, who did report
That very frankly he confessed his treasons,
Implored your Highness’ pardon, and set forth
A deep repentance. Nothing in his life
Became him like the leaving it. He died
As one that had been studied in his death
To throw away the dearest thing he owed
As ’twere a careless trifle.
DUNCAN  There’s no art
To find the mind’s construction in the face.
He was a gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.

Enter Macbeth, Banquo, Ross, and Angus.

O worthiest cousin,
The sin of my ingratitude even now
Was heavy on me. Thou art so far before
That swiftest wing of recompense is slow
To overtake thee. Would thou hadst less deserved,
That the proportion both of thanks and payment
Might have been mine! Only I have left to say,
More is thy due than more than all can pay.
MACBETH 
The service and the loyalty I owe
In doing it pays itself. Your Highness’ part
Is to receive our duties, and our duties
Are to your throne and state children and servants,
Which do but what they should by doing everything
Safe toward your love and honor.
DUNCAN  Welcome hither.
I have begun to plant thee and will labor
To make thee full of growing.—Noble Banquo,
That hast no less deserved nor must be known
No less to have done so, let me enfold thee
And hold thee to my heart.
BANQUO  There, if I grow,
The harvest is your own.
DUNCAN  My plenteous joys,
Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow.—Sons, kinsmen, thanes,
And you whose places are the nearest, know
We will establish our estate upon
Our eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
The Prince of Cumberland; which honor must
Not unaccompanied invest him only,
But signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine
On all deservers.—From hence to Inverness
And bind us further to you.
MACBETH 
The rest is labor which is not used for you.
I’ll be myself the harbinger and make joyful
The hearing of my wife with your approach.
So humbly take my leave.
DUNCAN  My worthy Cawdor.
MACBETH, aside 
The Prince of Cumberland! That is a step
On which I must fall down or else o’erleap,
For in my way it lies. Stars, hide your fires;
Let not light see my black and deep desires.
The eye wink at the hand, yet let that be
Which the eye fears, when it is done, to see.
He exits.
DUNCAN 
True, worthy Banquo. He is full so valiant,
And in his commendations I am fed:
It is a banquet to me.—Let’s after him,
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome.
It is a peerless kinsman.
Flourish. They exit.



Scene 5
Enter Macbeth’s Wife, alone, with a letter.

LADY MACBETH, reading the letter  They met me in the
day of success, and I have learned by the perfect’st
report they have more in them than mortal knowledge.
When I burned in desire to question them further, they
made themselves air, into which they vanished.
Whiles I stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives
from the King, who all-hailed me “Thane of Cawdor,”
by which title, before, these Weïrd Sisters saluted me
and referred me to the coming on of time with “Hail,
king that shalt be.” This have I thought good to deliver
thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou
might’st not lose the dues of rejoicing by being ignorant
of what greatness is promised thee. Lay it to thy
heart, and farewell.
Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
What thou art promised. Yet do I fear thy nature;
It is too full o’ th’ milk of human kindness
To catch the nearest way. Thou wouldst be great,
Art not without ambition, but without
The illness should attend it. What thou wouldst
highly,
That wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false
And yet wouldst wrongly win. Thou ’dst have, great
Glamis,
That which cries “Thus thou must do,” if thou have
it,
And that which rather thou dost fear to do,
Than wishest should be undone. Hie thee hither,
That I may pour my spirits in thine ear
And chastise with the valor of my tongue
All that impedes thee from the golden round,
Which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem
To have thee crowned withal.
Enter Messenger.

What is your tidings?
MESSENGER 
The King comes here tonight.
LADY MACBETH  Thou ’rt mad to say it.
Is not thy master with him, who, were ’t so,
Would have informed for preparation?
MESSENGER 
So please you, it is true. Our thane is coming.
One of my fellows had the speed of him,
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Than would make up his message.
LADY MACBETH  Give him tending.
He brings great news.Messenger exits.
The raven himself is hoarse
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan
Under my battlements. Come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here,
And fill me from the crown to the toe top-full
Of direst cruelty. Make thick my blood.
Stop up th’ access and passage to remorse,
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between
Th’ effect and it. Come to my woman’s breasts
And take my milk for gall, you murd’ring ministers,
Wherever in your sightless substances
You wait on nature’s mischief. Come, thick night,
And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell,
That my keen knife see not the wound it makes,
Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
To cry “Hold, hold!”

Enter Macbeth.

Great Glamis, worthy Cawdor,
Greater than both by the all-hail hereafter!
Thy letters have transported me beyond
This ignorant present, and I feel now
The future in the instant.
MACBETH  My dearest love,
Duncan comes here tonight.
LADY MACBETH  And when goes hence?
MACBETH 
Tomorrow, as he purposes.
LADY MACBETH  O, never
Shall sun that morrow see!
Your face, my thane, is as a book where men
May read strange matters. To beguile the time,
Look like the time. Bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue. Look like th’ innocent
flower,
But be the serpent under ’t. He that’s coming
Must be provided for; and you shall put
This night’s great business into my dispatch,
Which shall to all our nights and days to come
Give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
MACBETH 
We will speak further.
LADY MACBETH  Only look up clear.
To alter favor ever is to fear.
Leave all the rest to me.
They exit.


Scene 6
Hautboys and Torches. Enter King 
Duncan, Malcolm,
Donalbain, Banquo, Lennox, Macduff, Ross, Angus, and
Attendants.

DUNCAN 
This castle hath a pleasant seat. The air
Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself
Unto our gentle senses.
BANQUO  This guest of summer,
The temple-haunting martlet, does approve,
By his loved mansionry, that the heaven’s breath
Smells wooingly here. No jutty, frieze,
Buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird
Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle.
Where they most breed and haunt, I have
observed,
The air is delicate.

Enter Lady Macbeth.

DUNCAN  See, see our honored hostess!—
The love that follows us sometime is our trouble,
Which still we thank as love. Herein I teach you
How you shall bid God ’ild us for your pains
And thank us for your trouble.
LADY MACBETH  All our service,
In every point twice done and then done double,
Were poor and single business to contend
Against those honors deep and broad wherewith
Your Majesty loads our house. For those of old,
And the late dignities heaped up to them,
We rest your hermits.
DUNCAN  Where’s the Thane of Cawdor?
We coursed him at the heels and had a purpose
To be his purveyor; but he rides well,
And his great love, sharp as his spur, hath helped
him
To his home before us. Fair and noble hostess,
We are your guest tonight.
LADY MACBETH  Your servants ever
Have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt
To make their audit at your Highness’ pleasure,
Still to return your own.
DUNCAN  Give me your hand.
Taking her hand.
Conduct me to mine host. We love him highly
And shall continue our graces towards him.
By your leave, hostess.
They exit.


Scene 7
Hautboys. Torches. Enter a Sewer and divers Servants
with dishes and service over the stage. Then enter
Macbeth.

MACBETH 
If it were done when ’tis done, then ’twere well
It were done quickly. If th’ assassination
Could trammel up the consequence and catch
With his surcease success, that but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
We’d jump the life to come. But in these cases
We still have judgment here, that we but teach
Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return
To plague th’ inventor. This even-handed justice
Commends th’ ingredience of our poisoned chalice
To our own lips. He’s here in double trust:
First, as I am his kinsman and his subject,
Strong both against the deed; then, as his host,
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
Not bear the knife myself. Besides, this Duncan
Hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been
So clear in his great office, that his virtues
Will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against
The deep damnation of his taking-off;
And pity, like a naked newborn babe
Striding the blast, or heaven’s cherubin horsed
Upon the sightless couriers of the air,
Shall blow the horrid deed in every eye,
That tears shall drown the wind. I have no spur
To prick the sides of my intent, but only
Vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself
And falls on th’ other—

Enter Lady Macbeth.

How now, what news?
LADY MACBETH 
He has almost supped. Why have you left the
chamber?
MACBETH 
Hath he asked for me?
LADY MACBETH  Know you not he has?
MACBETH 
We will proceed no further in this business.
He hath honored me of late, and I have bought
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.
LADY MACBETH  Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dressed yourself? Hath it slept since?
And wakes it now, to look so green and pale
At what it did so freely? From this time
Such I account thy love. Art thou afeard
To be the same in thine own act and valor
As thou art in desire? Wouldst thou have that
Which thou esteem’st the ornament of life
And live a coward in thine own esteem,
Letting “I dare not” wait upon “I would,”
Like the poor cat i’ th’ adage?
MACBETH  Prithee, peace.
I dare do all that may become a man.
Who dares do more is none.
LADY MACBETH  What beast was ’t,
then,
That made you break this enterprise to me?
When you durst do it, then you were a man;
And to be more than what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Did then adhere, and yet you would make both.
They have made themselves, and that their fitness
now
Does unmake you. I have given suck, and know
How tender ’tis to love the babe that milks me.
I would, while it was smiling in my face,
Have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums
And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you
Have done to this.
MACBETH  If we should fail—
LADY MACBETH  We fail?
But screw your courage to the sticking place
And we’ll not fail. When Duncan is asleep
(Whereto the rather shall his day’s hard journey
Soundly invite him), his two chamberlains
Will I with wine and wassail so convince
That memory, the warder of the brain,
Shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason
A limbeck only. When in swinish sleep
Their drenchèd natures lies as in a death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
Th’ unguarded Duncan? What not put upon
His spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt
Of our great quell?
MACBETH  Bring forth men-children only,
For thy undaunted mettle should compose
Nothing but males. Will it not be received,
When we have marked with blood those sleepy two
Of his own chamber and used their very daggers,
That they have done ’t?
LADY MACBETH  Who dares receive it other,
As we shall make our griefs and clamor roar
Upon his death?
MACBETH  I am settled and bend up
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show.
False face must hide what the false heart doth
know.
They exit.



ACT 2
Scene 1
Enter Banquo, and Fleance with a torch before him.

BANQUO 
How goes the night, boy?
FLEANCE 
The moon is down. I have not heard the clock.
BANQUO  And she goes down at twelve.
FLEANCE  I take ’t ’tis later, sir.
BANQUO 
Hold, take my sword.He gives his sword to Fleance.
There’s husbandry in heaven;
Their candles are all out. Take thee that too.
A heavy summons lies like lead upon me,
And yet I would not sleep. Merciful powers,
Restrain in me the cursèd thoughts that nature
Gives way to in repose.

Enter Macbeth, and a Servant with a torch.

Give me my sword.—Who’s
there?
MACBETH  A friend.
BANQUO 
What, sir, not yet at rest? The King’s abed.
He hath been in unusual pleasure, and
Sent forth great largess to your offices.
This diamond he greets your wife withal,
By the name of most kind hostess, and shut up
In measureless content.
He gives Macbeth a jewel.
MACBETH  Being unprepared,
Our will became the servant to defect,
Which else should free have wrought.
BANQUO  All’s well.
I dreamt last night of the three Weïrd Sisters.
To you they have showed some truth.
MACBETH  I think not of
them.
Yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve,
We would spend it in some words upon that
business,
If you would grant the time.
BANQUO  At your kind’st leisure.
MACBETH 
If you shall cleave to my consent, when ’tis,
It shall make honor for you.
BANQUO  So I lose none
In seeking to augment it, but still keep
My bosom franchised and allegiance clear,
I shall be counseled.
MACBETH  Good repose the while.
BANQUO  Thanks, sir. The like to you.
Banquo and Fleance exit.
MACBETH 
Go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready,
She strike upon the bell. Get thee to bed.
Servant exits.
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch
thee.
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? Or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation
Proceeding from the heat-oppressèd brain?
I see thee yet, in form as palpable
As this which now I draw.He draws his dagger.
Thou marshal’st me the way that I was going,
And such an instrument I was to use.
Mine eyes are made the fools o’ th’ other senses
Or else worth all the rest. I see thee still,
And, on thy blade and dudgeon, gouts of blood,
Which was not so before. There’s no such thing.
It is the bloody business which informs
Thus to mine eyes. Now o’er the one-half world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams abuse
The curtained sleep. Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Hecate’s off’rings, and withered murder,
Alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf,
Whose howl’s his watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquin’s ravishing strides, towards his
design
Moves like a ghost. Thou sure and firm-set earth,
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my whereabouts
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it. Whiles I threat, he lives.
Words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
A bell rings.
I go, and it is done. The bell invites me.
Hear it not, Duncan, for it is a knell
That summons thee to heaven or to hell.
He exits.



Scene 2
Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH 
That which hath made them drunk hath made me
bold.
What hath quenched them hath given me fire.
Hark!—Peace.
It was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman,
Which gives the stern’st good-night. He is about it.
The doors are open, and the surfeited grooms
Do mock their charge with snores. I have drugged
their possets,
That death and nature do contend about them
Whether they live or die.
MACBETH, within  Who’s there? what, ho!
LADY MACBETH 
Alack, I am afraid they have awaked,
And ’tis not done. Th’ attempt and not the deed
Confounds us. Hark!—I laid their daggers ready;
He could not miss ’em. Had he not resembled
My father as he slept, I had done ’t.

Enter Macbeth with bloody daggers.

My husband?
MACBETH 
I have done the deed. Didst thou not hear a noise?
LADY MACBETH 
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.
Did not you speak?
MACBETH  When?
LADY MACBETH  Now.
MACBETH  As I descended?
LADY MACBETH  Ay.
MACBETH  Hark!—Who lies i’ th’ second chamber?
LADY MACBETH  Donalbain.
MACBETH  This is a sorry sight.
LADY MACBETH 
A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
MACBETH 
There’s one did laugh in ’s sleep, and one cried
“Murder!”
That they did wake each other. I stood and heard
them.
But they did say their prayers and addressed them
Again to sleep.
LADY MACBETH  There are two lodged together.
MACBETH 
One cried “God bless us” and “Amen” the other,
As they had seen me with these hangman’s hands,
List’ning their fear. I could not say “Amen”
When they did say “God bless us.”
LADY MACBETH  Consider it not so deeply.
MACBETH 
But wherefore could not I pronounce “Amen”?
I had most need of blessing, and “Amen”
Stuck in my throat.
LADY MACBETH  These deeds must not be thought
After these ways; so, it will make us mad.
MACBETH 
Methought I heard a voice cry “Sleep no more!
Macbeth does murder sleep”—the innocent sleep,
Sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care,
The death of each day’s life, sore labor’s bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast.
LADY MACBETH  What do you mean?
MACBETH 
Still it cried “Sleep no more!” to all the house.
“Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore
Cawdor
Shall sleep no more. Macbeth shall sleep no more.”
LADY MACBETH 
Who was it that thus cried? Why, worthy thane,
You do unbend your noble strength to think
So brainsickly of things. Go get some water
And wash this filthy witness from your hand.—
Why did you bring these daggers from the place?
They must lie there. Go, carry them and smear
The sleepy grooms with blood.
MACBETH  I’ll go no more.
I am afraid to think what I have done.
Look on ’t again I dare not.
LADY MACBETH  Infirm of purpose!
Give me the daggers. The sleeping and the dead
Are but as pictures. ’Tis the eye of childhood
That fears a painted devil. If he do bleed,
I’ll gild the faces of the grooms withal,
For it must seem their guilt.
She exits with the daggers. Knock within.
MACBETH  Whence is that
knocking?
How is ’t with me when every noise appalls me?
What hands are here! Ha, they pluck out mine eyes.
Will all great Neptune’s ocean wash this blood
Clean from my hand? No, this my hand will rather
The multitudinous seas incarnadine,
Making the green one red.

Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH 
My hands are of your color, but I shame
To wear a heart so white.Knock.
I hear a knocking
At the south entry. Retire we to our chamber.
A little water clears us of this deed.
How easy is it, then! Your constancy
Hath left you unattended.Knock.
Hark, more knocking.
Get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us
And show us to be watchers. Be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.
MACBETH 
To know my deed ’twere best not know myself.
Knock.
Wake Duncan with thy knocking. I would thou
couldst.
They exit.


Scene 3
Knocking within. Enter a Porter.

PORTER 
Here’s a knocking indeed! If a man were
porter of hell gate, he should have old turning the
key. (Knock.) Knock, knock, knock! Who’s there, i’
th’ name of Beelzebub? Here’s a farmer that hanged
himself on th’ expectation of plenty. Come in time!
Have napkins enough about you; here you’ll sweat
for ’t. (Knock.) Knock, knock! Who’s there, in th’
other devil’s name? Faith, here’s an equivocator
that could swear in both the scales against either
scale, who committed treason enough for God’s
sake yet could not equivocate to heaven. O, come in,
equivocator. (Knock.) Knock, knock, knock! Who’s
there? Faith, here’s an English tailor come hither for
stealing out of a French hose. Come in, tailor. Here
you may roast your goose. (Knock.) Knock, knock!
Never at quiet.—What are you?—But this place is
too cold for hell. I’ll devil-porter it no further. I had
thought to have let in some of all professions that go
the primrose way to th’ everlasting bonfire. (Knock.)
Anon, anon!

The Porter opens the door to Macduff and Lennox.

I pray you, remember the porter.
MACDUFF 
Was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed
That you do lie so late?
PORTER  Faith, sir, we were carousing till the second
cock, and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three
things.
MACDUFF  What three things does drink especially
provoke?
PORTER  Marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine.
Lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. It provokes
the desire, but it takes away the performance.
Therefore much drink may be said to be an
equivocator with lechery. It makes him, and it
mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it
persuades him and disheartens him; makes him
stand to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates
him in a sleep and, giving him the lie, leaves
him.
MACDUFF  I believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
PORTER  That it did, sir, i’ th’ very throat on me; but I
requited him for his lie, and, I think, being too
strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime,
yet I made a shift to cast him.
MACDUFF  Is thy master stirring?

Enter Macbeth.

Our knocking has awaked him. Here he comes.
Porter exits.
LENNOX 
Good morrow, noble sir.
MACBETH  Good morrow, both.
MACDUFF 
Is the King stirring, worthy thane?
MACBETH  Not yet.
MACDUFF 
He did command me to call timely on him.
I have almost slipped the hour.
MACBETH  I’ll bring you to him.
MACDUFF 
I know this is a joyful trouble to you,
But yet ’tis one.
MACBETH 
The labor we delight in physics pain.
This is the door.
MACDUFF  I’ll make so bold to call,
For ’tis my limited service.Macduff exits.
LENNOX  Goes the King hence today?
MACBETH  He does. He did appoint so.
LENNOX 
The night has been unruly. Where we lay,
Our chimneys were blown down and, as they say,
Lamentings heard i’ th’ air, strange screams of
death,
And prophesying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combustion and confused events
New hatched to th’ woeful time. The obscure bird
Clamored the livelong night. Some say the Earth
Was feverous and did shake.
MACBETH  ’Twas a rough night.
LENNOX 
My young remembrance cannot parallel
A fellow to it.

Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF  O horror, horror, horror!
Tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!
MACBETH AND LENNOX  What’s the matter?
MACDUFF 
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece.
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope
The Lord’s anointed temple and stole thence
The life o’ th’ building.
MACBETH  What is ’t you say? The life?
LENNOX  Mean you his Majesty?
MACDUFF 
Approach the chamber and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Do not bid me speak.
See and then speak yourselves.
Macbeth and Lennox exit.
Awake, awake!
Ring the alarum bell.—Murder and treason!
Banquo and Donalbain, Malcolm, awake!
Shake off this downy sleep, death’s counterfeit,
And look on death itself. Up, up, and see
The great doom’s image. Malcolm, Banquo,
As from your graves rise up and walk like sprites
To countenance this horror.—Ring the bell.
Bell rings.

Enter Lady Macbeth.

LADY MACBETH  What’s the business,
That such a hideous trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the house? Speak, speak!
MACDUFF  O gentle lady,
’Tis not for you to hear what I can speak.
The repetition in a woman’s ear
Would murder as it fell.

Enter Banquo.

O Banquo, Banquo,
Our royal master’s murdered.
LADY MACBETH  Woe, alas!
What, in our house?
BANQUO  Too cruel anywhere.—
Dear Duff, I prithee, contradict thyself
And say it is not so.
Enter Macbeth, Lennox, and Ross.

MACBETH 
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had lived a blessèd time; for from this instant
There’s nothing serious in mortality.
All is but toys. Renown and grace is dead.
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Is left this vault to brag of.

Enter Malcolm and Donalbain.

DONALBAIN  What is amiss?
MACBETH  You are, and do not know ’t.
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.
MACDUFF 
Your royal father’s murdered.
MALCOLM  O, by whom?
LENNOX 
Those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done ’t.
Their hands and faces were all badged with blood.
So were their daggers, which unwiped we found
Upon their pillows. They stared and were distracted.
No man’s life was to be trusted with them.
MACBETH 
O, yet I do repent me of my fury,
That I did kill them.
MACDUFF  Wherefore did you so?
MACBETH 
Who can be wise, amazed, temp’rate, and furious,
Loyal, and neutral, in a moment? No man.
Th’ expedition of my violent love
Outrun the pauser, reason. Here lay Duncan,
His silver skin laced with his golden blood,
And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature
For ruin’s wasteful entrance; there the murderers,
Steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers
Unmannerly breeched with gore. Who could refrain
That had a heart to love, and in that heart
Courage to make ’s love known?
LADY MACBETH  Help me hence, ho!
MACDUFF 
Look to the lady.
MALCOLM, aside to Donalbain  Why do we hold our
tongues,
That most may claim this argument for ours?
DONALBAIN, aside to Malcolm 
What should be spoken here, where our fate,
Hid in an auger hole, may rush and seize us?
Let’s away. Our tears are not yet brewed.
MALCOLM, aside to Donalbain 
Nor our strong sorrow upon the foot of motion.
BANQUO  Look to the lady.
Lady Macbeth is assisted to leave.
And when we have our naked frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure, let us meet
And question this most bloody piece of work
To know it further. Fears and scruples shake us.
In the great hand of God I stand, and thence
Against the undivulged pretense I fight
Of treasonous malice.
MACDUFF  And so do I.
ALL  So all.
MACBETH 
Let’s briefly put on manly readiness
And meet i’ th’ hall together.
ALL  Well contented.
All but Malcolm and Donalbain exit.
MALCOLM 
What will you do? Let’s not consort with them.
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office
Which the false man does easy. I’ll to England.
DONALBAIN 
To Ireland I. Our separated fortune
Shall keep us both the safer. Where we are,
There’s daggers in men’s smiles. The near in blood,
The nearer bloody.
MALCOLM  This murderous shaft that’s shot
Hath not yet lighted, and our safest way
Is to avoid the aim. Therefore to horse,
And let us not be dainty of leave-taking
But shift away. There’s warrant in that theft
Which steals itself when there’s no mercy left.
They exit.


Scene 4
Enter Ross with an Old Man.

OLD MAN 
Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the volume of which time I have seen
Hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore
night
Hath trifled former knowings.
ROSS  Ha, good father,
Thou seest the heavens, as troubled with man’s act,
Threatens his bloody stage. By th’ clock ’tis day,
And yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp.
Is ’t night’s predominance or the day’s shame
That darkness does the face of earth entomb
When living light should kiss it?
OLD MAN  ’Tis unnatural,
Even like the deed that’s done. On Tuesday last
A falcon, tow’ring in her pride of place,
Was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.
ROSS 
And Duncan’s horses (a thing most strange and
certain),
Beauteous and swift, the minions of their race,
Turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out,
Contending ’gainst obedience, as they would
Make war with mankind.
OLD MAN  ’Tis said they eat each
other.
ROSS 
They did so, to th’ amazement of mine eyes
That looked upon ’t.

Enter Macduff.

Here comes the good
Macduff.—
How goes the world, sir, now?
MACDUFF  Why, see you not?
ROSS 
Is ’t known who did this more than bloody deed?
MACDUFF 
Those that Macbeth hath slain.
ROSS  Alas the day,
What good could they pretend?
MACDUFF  They were suborned.
Malcolm and Donalbain, the King’s two sons,
Are stol’n away and fled, which puts upon them
Suspicion of the deed.
ROSS  ’Gainst nature still!
Thriftless ambition, that will ravin up
Thine own lives’ means. Then ’tis most like
The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth.
MACDUFF 
He is already named and gone to Scone
To be invested.
ROSS  Where is Duncan’s body?
MACDUFF  Carried to Colmekill,
The sacred storehouse of his predecessors
And guardian of their bones.
ROSS  Will you to Scone?
MACDUFF 
No, cousin, I’ll to Fife.
ROSS  Well, I will thither.
MACDUFF 
Well, may you see things well done there. Adieu,
Lest our old robes sit easier than our new.
ROSS  Farewell, father.
OLD MAN 
God’s benison go with you and with those
That would make good of bad and friends of foes.
All exit.



ACT 3
Scene 1
Enter Banquo.

BANQUO 
Thou hast it now—king, Cawdor, Glamis, all
As the Weïrd Women promised, and I fear
Thou played’st most foully for ’t. Yet it was said
It should not stand in thy posterity,
But that myself should be the root and father
Of many kings. If there come truth from them
(As upon thee, Macbeth, their speeches shine)
Why, by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my oracles as well,
And set me up in hope? But hush, no more.

Sennet sounded. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady
Macbeth, Lennox, Ross, Lords, and Attendants.

MACBETH 
Here’s our chief guest.
LADY MACBETH  If he had been forgotten,
It had been as a gap in our great feast
And all-thing unbecoming.
MACBETH 
Tonight we hold a solemn supper, sir,
And I’ll request your presence.
BANQUO  Let your Highness
Command upon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tie
Forever knit.
MACBETH  Ride you this afternoon?
BANQUO  Ay, my good lord.
MACBETH 
We should have else desired your good advice
(Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)
In this day’s council, but we’ll take tomorrow.
Is ’t far you ride?
BANQUO 
As far, my lord, as will fill up the time
’Twixt this and supper. Go not my horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the night
For a dark hour or twain.
MACBETH  Fail not our feast.
BANQUO  My lord, I will not.
MACBETH 
We hear our bloody cousins are bestowed
In England and in Ireland, not confessing
Their cruel parricide, filling their hearers
With strange invention. But of that tomorrow,
When therewithal we shall have cause of state
Craving us jointly. Hie you to horse. Adieu,
Till you return at night. Goes Fleance with you?
BANQUO 
Ay, my good lord. Our time does call upon ’s.
MACBETH 
I wish your horses swift and sure of foot,
And so I do commend you to their backs.
Farewell.Banquo exits.
Let every man be master of his time
Till seven at night. To make society
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
Till suppertime alone. While then, God be with you.
Lords and all but Macbeth and a Servant exit.
Sirrah, a word with you. Attend those men
Our pleasure?
SERVANT 
They are, my lord, without the palace gate.
MACBETH 
Bring them before us.Servant exits.
To be thus is nothing,
But to be safely thus. Our fears in Banquo
Stick deep, and in his royalty of nature
Reigns that which would be feared. ’Tis much he
dares,
And to that dauntless temper of his mind
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor
To act in safety. There is none but he
Whose being I do fear; and under him
My genius is rebuked, as it is said
Mark Antony’s was by Caesar. He chid the sisters
When first they put the name of king upon me
And bade them speak to him. Then, prophet-like,
They hailed him father to a line of kings.
Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown
And put a barren scepter in my grip,
Thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand,
No son of mine succeeding. If ’t be so,
For Banquo’s issue have I filed my mind;
For them the gracious Duncan have I murdered,
Put rancors in the vessel of my peace
Only for them, and mine eternal jewel
Given to the common enemy of man
To make them kings, the seeds of Banquo kings.
Rather than so, come fate into the list,
And champion me to th’ utterance.—Who’s there?

Enter Servant and two Murderers.

To the Servant. Now go to the door, and stay there
till we call.Servant exits.
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?
MURDERERS 
It was, so please your Highness.
MACBETH  Well then, now
Have you considered of my speeches? Know
That it was he, in the times past, which held you
So under fortune, which you thought had been
Our innocent self. This I made good to you
In our last conference, passed in probation with you
How you were borne in hand, how crossed, the
instruments,
Who wrought with them, and all things else that
might
To half a soul and to a notion crazed
Say “Thus did Banquo.”
FIRST MURDERER  You made it known to us.
MACBETH 
I did so, and went further, which is now
Our point of second meeting. Do you find
Your patience so predominant in your nature
That you can let this go? Are you so gospeled
To pray for this good man and for his issue,
Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave
And beggared yours forever?
FIRST MURDERER  We are men, my liege.
MACBETH 
Ay, in the catalogue you go for men,
As hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels,
curs,
Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept
All by the name of dogs. The valued file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The housekeeper, the hunter, every one
According to the gift which bounteous nature
Hath in him closed; whereby he does receive
Particular addition, from the bill
That writes them all alike. And so of men.
Now, if you have a station in the file,
Not i’ th’ worst rank of manhood, say ’t,
And I will put that business in your bosoms
Whose execution takes your enemy off,
Grapples you to the heart and love of us,
Who wear our health but sickly in his life,
Which in his death were perfect.
SECOND MURDERER  I am one, my liege,
Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world
Hath so incensed that I am reckless what
I do to spite the world.
FIRST MURDERER  And I another
So weary with disasters, tugged with fortune,
That I would set my life on any chance,
To mend it or be rid on ’t.
MACBETH  Both of you
Know Banquo was your enemy.
MURDERERS  True, my lord.
MACBETH 
So is he mine, and in such bloody distance
That every minute of his being thrusts
Against my near’st of life. And though I could
With barefaced power sweep him from my sight
And bid my will avouch it, yet I must not,
For certain friends that are both his and mine,
Whose loves I may not drop, but wail his fall
Who I myself struck down. And thence it is
That I to your assistance do make love,
Masking the business from the common eye
For sundry weighty reasons.
SECOND MURDERER  We shall, my lord,
Perform what you command us.
FIRST MURDERER  Though our lives—
MACBETH 
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at
most
I will advise you where to plant yourselves,
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o’ th’ time,
The moment on ’t, for ’t must be done tonight
And something from the palace; always thought
That I require a clearness. And with him
(To leave no rubs nor botches in the work)
Fleance, his son, that keeps him company,
Whose absence is no less material to me
Than is his father’s, must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Resolve yourselves apart.
I’ll come to you anon.
MURDERERS  We are resolved, my lord.
MACBETH 
I’ll call upon you straight. Abide within.
Murderers exit.
It is concluded. Banquo, thy soul’s flight,
If it find heaven, must find it out tonight.
He exits.



Scene 2
Enter Macbeth’s Lady and a Servant.

LADY MACBETH 
Is Banquo gone from court?
SERVANT 
Ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
LADY MACBETH 
Say to the King I would attend his leisure
For a few words.
SERVANT  Madam, I will.He exits.
LADY MACBETH  Naught’s had, all’s spent,
Where our desire is got without content.
’Tis safer to be that which we destroy
Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
Enter Macbeth.

How now, my lord, why do you keep alone,
Of sorriest fancies your companions making,
Using those thoughts which should indeed have died
With them they think on? Things without all remedy
Should be without regard. What’s done is done.
MACBETH 
We have scorched the snake, not killed it.
She’ll close and be herself whilst our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former tooth.
But let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds
suffer,
Ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep
In the affliction of these terrible dreams
That shake us nightly. Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace,
Than on the torture of the mind to lie
In restless ecstasy. Duncan is in his grave.
After life’s fitful fever he sleeps well.
Treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison,
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
Can touch him further.
LADY MACBETH  Come on, gentle my lord,
Sleek o’er your rugged looks. Be bright and jovial
Among your guests tonight.
MACBETH  So shall I, love,
And so I pray be you. Let your remembrance
Apply to Banquo; present him eminence
Both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we
Must lave our honors in these flattering streams
And make our faces vizards to our hearts,
Disguising what they are.
LADY MACBETH  You must leave this.
MACBETH 
O, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife!
Thou know’st that Banquo and his Fleance lives.
LADY MACBETH 
But in them nature’s copy’s not eterne.
MACBETH 
There’s comfort yet; they are assailable.
Then be thou jocund. Ere the bat hath flown
His cloistered flight, ere to black Hecate’s summons
The shard-born beetle with his drowsy hums
Hath rung night’s yawning peal, there shall be done
A deed of dreadful note.
LADY MACBETH  What’s to be done?
MACBETH 
Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed.—Come, seeling night,
Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day
And with thy bloody and invisible hand
Cancel and tear to pieces that great bond
Which keeps me pale. Light thickens, and the crow
Makes wing to th’ rooky wood.
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
Whiles night’s black agents to their preys do
rouse.—
Thou marvel’st at my words, but hold thee still.
Things bad begun make strong themselves by ill.
So prithee go with me.
They exit.


Scene 3
Enter three Murderers.

FIRST MURDERER 
But who did bid thee join with us?
THIRD MURDERER  Macbeth.
SECOND MURDERER, to the First Murderer 
He needs not our mistrust, since he delivers
Our offices and what we have to do
To the direction just.
FIRST MURDERER  Then stand with us.—
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day.
Now spurs the lated traveler apace
To gain the timely inn, and near approaches
The subject of our watch.
THIRD MURDERER  Hark, I hear horses.
BANQUO, within  Give us a light there, ho!
SECOND MURDERER  Then ’tis he. The rest
That are within the note of expectation
Already are i’ th’ court.
FIRST MURDERER  His horses go about.
THIRD MURDERER 
Almost a mile; but he does usually
(So all men do) from hence to th’ palace gate
Make it their walk.

Enter Banquo and Fleance, with a torch.

SECOND MURDERER  A light, a light!
THIRD MURDERER  ’Tis he.
FIRST MURDERER  Stand to ’t.
BANQUO, to Fleance  It will be rain tonight.
FIRST MURDERER  Let it come down!
The three Murderers attack.
BANQUO 
O treachery! Fly, good Fleance, fly, fly, fly!
Thou mayst revenge—O slave!
He dies. Fleance exits.
THIRD MURDERER 
Who did strike out the light?
FIRST MURDERER  Was ’t not the way?
THIRD MURDERER  There’s but one down. The son is
fled.
SECOND MURDERER  We have lost best half of our
affair.
FIRST MURDERER 
Well, let’s away and say how much is done.
They exit.



Scene 4
Banquet prepared. Enter Macbeth, Lady Macbeth,
Ross, Lennox, Lords, and Attendants.

MACBETH 
You know your own degrees; sit down. At first
And last, the hearty welcome.They sit.
LORDS  Thanks to your Majesty.
MACBETH 
Ourself will mingle with society
And play the humble host.
Our hostess keeps her state, but in best time
We will require her welcome.
LADY MACBETH 
Pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends,
For my heart speaks they are welcome.

Enter First Murderer to the door.

MACBETH 
See, they encounter thee with their hearts’ thanks.
Both sides are even. Here I’ll sit i’ th’ midst.
Be large in mirth. Anon we’ll drink a measure
The table round. He approaches the Murderer. There’s
blood upon thy face.
MURDERER  ’Tis Banquo’s then.
MACBETH 
’Tis better thee without than he within.
Is he dispatched?
MURDERER 
My lord, his throat is cut. That I did for him.
MACBETH 
Thou art the best o’ th’ cutthroats,
Yet he’s good that did the like for Fleance.
If thou didst it, thou art the nonpareil.
MURDERER 
Most royal sir, Fleance is ’scaped.
MACBETH, aside 
Then comes my fit again. I had else been perfect,
Whole as the marble, founded as the rock,
As broad and general as the casing air.
But now I am cabined, cribbed, confined, bound in
To saucy doubts and fears.—But Banquo’s safe?
MURDERER 
Ay, my good lord. Safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenchèd gashes on his head,
The least a death to nature.
MACBETH  Thanks for that.
There the grown serpent lies. The worm that’s fled
Hath nature that in time will venom breed,
No teeth for th’ present. Get thee gone. Tomorrow
We’ll hear ourselves again.Murderer exits.
LADY MACBETH  My royal lord,
You do not give the cheer. The feast is sold
That is not often vouched, while ’tis a-making,
’Tis given with welcome. To feed were best at home;
From thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony;
Meeting were bare without it.

Enter the Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeth’s place.

MACBETH, to Lady Macbeth  Sweet remembrancer!—
Now, good digestion wait on appetite
And health on both!
LENNOX  May ’t please your Highness sit.
MACBETH 
Here had we now our country’s honor roofed,
Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
Who may I rather challenge for unkindness
Than pity for mischance.
ROSS  His absence, sir,
Lays blame upon his promise. Please ’t your
Highness
To grace us with your royal company?
MACBETH 
The table’s full.
LENNOX  Here is a place reserved, sir.
MACBETH  Where?
LENNOX 
Here, my good lord. What is ’t that moves your
Highness?
MACBETH 
Which of you have done this?
LORDS  What, my good lord?
MACBETH, to the Ghost 
Thou canst not say I did it. Never shake
Thy gory locks at me.
ROSS 
Gentlemen, rise. His Highness is not well.
LADY MACBETH 
Sit, worthy friends. My lord is often thus
And hath been from his youth. Pray you, keep seat.
The fit is momentary; upon a thought
He will again be well. If much you note him
You shall offend him and extend his passion.
Feed and regard him not.Drawing Macbeth aside.
Are you a man?
MACBETH 
Ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that
Which might appall the devil.
LADY MACBETH  O, proper stuff!
This is the very painting of your fear.
This is the air-drawn dagger which you said
Led you to Duncan. O, these flaws and starts,
Impostors to true fear, would well become
A woman’s story at a winter’s fire,
Authorized by her grandam. Shame itself!
Why do you make such faces? When all’s done,
You look but on a stool.
MACBETH 
Prithee, see there. Behold, look! To the Ghost. Lo,
how say you?
Why, what care I? If thou canst nod, speak too.—
If charnel houses and our graves must send
Those that we bury back, our monuments
Shall be the maws of kites.Ghost exits.
LADY MACBETH  What, quite unmanned in folly?
MACBETH 
If I stand here, I saw him.
LADY MACBETH  Fie, for shame!
MACBETH 
Blood hath been shed ere now, i’ th’ olden time,
Ere humane statute purged the gentle weal;
Ay, and since too, murders have been performed
Too terrible for the ear. The time has been
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end. But now they rise again
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns
And push us from our stools. This is more strange
Than such a murder is.
LADY MACBETH  My worthy lord,
Your noble friends do lack you.
MACBETH  I do forget.—
Do not muse at me, my most worthy friends.
I have a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me. Come, love and health to
all.
Then I’ll sit down.—Give me some wine. Fill full.

Enter Ghost.

I drink to th’ general joy o’ th’ whole table
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss.
Would he were here! To all, and him we thirst,
And all to all.
LORDS  Our duties, and the pledge.
They raise their drinking cups.
MACBETH, to the Ghost 
Avaunt, and quit my sight! Let the earth hide thee.
Thy bones are marrowless; thy blood is cold;
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with.
LADY MACBETH  Think of this, good
peers,
But as a thing of custom. ’Tis no other;
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
MACBETH, to the Ghost  What man dare, I dare.
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear,
The armed rhinoceros, or th’ Hyrcan tiger;
Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves
Shall never tremble. Or be alive again
And dare me to the desert with thy sword.
If trembling I inhabit then, protest me
The baby of a girl. Hence, horrible shadow!
Unreal mock’ry, hence!Ghost exits.
Why so, being gone,
I am a man again.—Pray you sit still.
LADY MACBETH 
You have displaced the mirth, broke the good
meeting
With most admired disorder.
MACBETH  Can such things be
And overcome us like a summer’s cloud,
Without our special wonder? You make me strange
Even to the disposition that I owe
When now I think you can behold such sights
And keep the natural ruby of your cheeks
When mine is blanched with fear.
ROSS  What sights, my
lord?
LADY MACBETH 
I pray you, speak not. He grows worse and worse.
Question enrages him. At once, good night.
Stand not upon the order of your going,
But go at once.
LENNOX  Good night, and better health
Attend his Majesty.
LADY MACBETH  A kind good night to all.
Lords and all but Macbeth and Lady Macbeth exit.
MACBETH 
It will have blood, they say; blood will have blood.
Stones have been known to move, and trees to
speak.
Augurs and understood relations have
By maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought
forth
The secret’st man of blood.—What is the night?
LADY MACBETH 
Almost at odds with morning, which is which.
MACBETH 
How say’st thou that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding?
LADY MACBETH  Did you send to him, sir?
MACBETH 
I hear it by the way; but I will send.
There’s not a one of them but in his house
I keep a servant fee’d. I will tomorrow
(And betimes I will) to the Weïrd Sisters.
More shall they speak, for now I am bent to know
By the worst means the worst. For mine own good,
All causes shall give way. I am in blood
Stepped in so far that, should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go o’er.
Strange things I have in head that will to hand,
Which must be acted ere they may be scanned.
LADY MACBETH 
You lack the season of all natures, sleep.
MACBETH 
Come, we’ll to sleep. My strange and self-abuse
Is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
We are yet but young in deed.
They exit.



Scene 5
Thunder. Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecate.

FIRST WITCH 
Why, how now, Hecate? You look angerly.
HECATE 
Have I not reason, beldams as you are?
Saucy and overbold, how did you dare
To trade and traffic with Macbeth
In riddles and affairs of death,
And I, the mistress of your charms,
The close contriver of all harms,
Was never called to bear my part
Or show the glory of our art?
And which is worse, all you have done
Hath been but for a wayward son,
Spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do,
Loves for his own ends, not for you.
But make amends now. Get you gone,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meet me i’ th’ morning. Thither he
Will come to know his destiny.
Your vessels and your spells provide,
Your charms and everything beside.
I am for th’ air. This night I’ll spend
Unto a dismal and a fatal end.
Great business must be wrought ere noon.
Upon the corner of the moon
There hangs a vap’rous drop profound.
I’ll catch it ere it come to ground,
And that, distilled by magic sleights,
Shall raise such artificial sprites
As by the strength of their illusion
Shall draw him on to his confusion.
He shall spurn fate, scorn death, and bear
His hopes ’bove wisdom, grace, and fear.
And you all know, security
Is mortals’ chiefest enemy.
Music and a song.
Hark! I am called. My little spirit, see,
Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me.Hecate exits.
Sing within “Come away, come away,” etc.
FIRST WITCH 
Come, let’s make haste. She’ll soon be back again.
They exit.


Scene 6
Enter Lennox and another Lord.

LENNOX 
My former speeches have but hit your thoughts,
Which can interpret farther. Only I say
Things have been strangely borne. The gracious
Duncan
Was pitied of Macbeth; marry, he was dead.
And the right valiant Banquo walked too late,
Whom you may say, if ’t please you, Fleance killed,
For Fleance fled. Men must not walk too late.
Who cannot want the thought how monstrous
It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain
To kill their gracious father? Damnèd fact,
How it did grieve Macbeth! Did he not straight
In pious rage the two delinquents tear
That were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep?
Was not that nobly done? Ay, and wisely, too,
For ’twould have angered any heart alive
To hear the men deny ’t. So that I say
He has borne all things well. And I do think
That had he Duncan’s sons under his key
(As, an ’t please heaven, he shall not) they should
find
What ’twere to kill a father. So should Fleance.
But peace. For from broad words, and ’cause he
failed
His presence at the tyrant’s feast, I hear
Macduff lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?
LORD  The son of Duncan
(From whom this tyrant holds the due of birth)
Lives in the English court and is received
Of the most pious Edward with such grace
That the malevolence of fortune nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduff
Is gone to pray the holy king upon his aid
To wake Northumberland and warlike Siward
That, by the help of these (with Him above
To ratify the work), we may again
Give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights,
Free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives,
Do faithful homage, and receive free honors,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate the King that he
Prepares for some attempt of war.
LENNOX  Sent he to Macduff?
LORD 
He did, and with an absolute “Sir, not I,”
The cloudy messenger turns me his back
And hums, as who should say “You’ll rue the time
That clogs me with this answer.”
LENNOX  And that well might
Advise him to a caution t’ hold what distance
His wisdom can provide. Some holy angel
Fly to the court of England and unfold
His message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soon return to this our suffering country
Under a hand accursed.
LORD 
I’ll send my prayers with him.
They exit.



ACT 4
Scene 1
Thunder. Enter the three Witches.

FIRST WITCH 
Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.
SECOND WITCH 
Thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.
THIRD WITCH 
Harpier cries “’Tis time, ’tis time!”
FIRST WITCH 
Round about the cauldron go;
In the poisoned entrails throw.
Toad, that under cold stone
Days and nights has thirty-one
Sweltered venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first i’ th’ charmèd pot.
The Witches circle the cauldron.
ALL 
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
SECOND WITCH 
Fillet of a fenny snake
In the cauldron boil and bake.
Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog,
Adder’s fork and blindworm’s sting,
Lizard’s leg and howlet’s wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
ALL 
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
THIRD WITCH 
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witch’s mummy, maw and gulf
Of the ravined salt-sea shark,
Root of hemlock digged i’ th’ dark,
Liver of blaspheming Jew,
Gall of goat and slips of yew
Slivered in the moon’s eclipse,
Nose of Turk and Tartar’s lips,
Finger of birth-strangled babe
Ditch-delivered by a drab,
Make the gruel thick and slab.
Add thereto a tiger’s chaudron
For th’ ingredience of our cauldron.
ALL 
Double, double toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
SECOND WITCH 
Cool it with a baboon’s blood.
Then the charm is firm and good.

Enter Hecate to the other three Witches.

HECATE 
O, well done! I commend your pains,
And everyone shall share i’ th’ gains.
And now about the cauldron sing
Like elves and fairies in a ring,
Enchanting all that you put in.
Music and a song: “Black Spirits,” etc. Hecate exits.
SECOND WITCH 
By the pricking of my thumbs,
Something wicked this way comes.
Open, locks,
Whoever knocks.

Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH 
How now, you secret, black, and midnight hags?
What is ’t you do?
ALL  A deed without a name.
MACBETH 
I conjure you by that which you profess
(Howe’er you come to know it), answer me.
Though you untie the winds and let them fight
Against the churches, though the yeasty waves
Confound and swallow navigation up,
Though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown
down,
Though castles topple on their warders’ heads,
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
Their heads to their foundations, though the
treasure
Of nature’s germens tumble all together
Even till destruction sicken, answer me
To what I ask you.
FIRST WITCH  Speak.
SECOND WITCH  Demand.
THIRD WITCH  We’ll answer.
FIRST WITCH 
Say if th’ hadst rather hear it from our mouths
Or from our masters’.
MACBETH  Call ’em. Let me see ’em.
FIRST WITCH 
Pour in sow’s blood that hath eaten
Her nine farrow; grease that’s sweaten
From the murderers’ gibbet throw
Into the flame.
ALL  Come high or low;
Thyself and office deftly show.

Thunder. First Apparition, an Armed Head.

MACBETH 
Tell me, thou unknown power—
FIRST WITCH  He knows thy
thought.
Hear his speech but say thou naught.
FIRST APPARITION 
Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth! Beware Macduff!
Beware the Thane of Fife! Dismiss me. Enough.
He descends.
MACBETH 
Whate’er thou art, for thy good caution, thanks.
Thou hast harped my fear aright. But one word
more—
FIRST WITCH 
He will not be commanded. Here’s another
More potent than the first.

Thunder. Second Apparition, a Bloody Child.

SECOND APPARITION  Macbeth! Macbeth! Macbeth!—
MACBETH  Had I three ears, I’d hear thee.
SECOND APPARITION 
Be bloody, bold, and resolute. Laugh to scorn
The power of man, for none of woman born
Shall harm Macbeth.He descends.
MACBETH 
Then live, Macduff; what need I fear of thee?
But yet I’ll make assurance double sure
And take a bond of fate. Thou shalt not live,
That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies,
And sleep in spite of thunder.
Thunder. Third Apparition, a Child Crowned, with a tree
in his hand.

What is this
That rises like the issue of a king
And wears upon his baby brow the round
And top of sovereignty?
ALL  Listen but speak not to ’t.
THIRD APPARITION 
Be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care
Who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are.
Macbeth shall never vanquished be until
Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill
Shall come against him.He descends.
MACBETH  That will never be.
Who can impress the forest, bid the tree
Unfix his earthbound root? Sweet bodements, good!
Rebellious dead, rise never till the Wood
Of Birnam rise, and our high-placed Macbeth
Shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath
To time and mortal custom. Yet my heart
Throbs to know one thing. Tell me, if your art
Can tell so much: shall Banquo’s issue ever
Reign in this kingdom?
ALL  Seek to know no more.
MACBETH 
I will be satisfied. Deny me this,
And an eternal curse fall on you! Let me know!
Cauldron sinks. Hautboys.
Why sinks that cauldron? And what noise is this?
FIRST WITCH  Show.
SECOND WITCH  Show.
THIRD WITCH  Show.
ALL 
Show his eyes and grieve his heart.
Come like shadows; so depart.
A show of eight kings, the eighth king with a glass in
his hand, and Banquo last.

MACBETH 
Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo. Down!
Thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. And thy hair,
Thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first.
A third is like the former.—Filthy hags,
Why do you show me this?—A fourth? Start, eyes!
What, will the line stretch out to th’ crack of doom?
Another yet? A seventh? I’ll see no more.
And yet the eighth appears who bears a glass
Which shows me many more, and some I see
That twofold balls and treble scepters carry.
Horrible sight! Now I see ’tis true,
For the blood-boltered Banquo smiles upon me
And points at them for his.
The Apparitions disappear.
What, is this so?
FIRST WITCH 
Ay, sir, all this is so. But why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly?
Come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites
And show the best of our delights.
I’ll charm the air to give a sound
While you perform your antic round,
That this great king may kindly say
Our duties did his welcome pay.
Music. The Witches dance and vanish.
MACBETH 
Where are they? Gone? Let this pernicious hour
Stand aye accursèd in the calendar!—
Come in, without there.

Enter Lennox.

LENNOX  What’s your Grace’s will?
MACBETH 
Saw you the Weïrd Sisters?
LENNOX  No, my lord.
MACBETH 
Came they not by you?
LENNOX  No, indeed, my lord.
MACBETH 
Infected be the air whereon they ride,
And damned all those that trust them! I did hear
The galloping of horse. Who was ’t came by?
LENNOX 
’Tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word
Macduff is fled to England.
MACBETH  Fled to England?
LENNOX  Ay, my good lord.
MACBETH, aside 
Time, thou anticipat’st my dread exploits.
The flighty purpose never is o’ertook
Unless the deed go with it. From this moment
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And even now,
To crown my thoughts with acts, be it thought and
done:
The castle of Macduff I will surprise,
Seize upon Fife, give to th’ edge o’ th’ sword
His wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls
That trace him in his line. No boasting like a fool;
This deed I’ll do before this purpose cool.
But no more sights!—Where are these gentlemen?
Come bring me where they are.
They exit.



Scene 2
Enter Macduff’s Wife, her Son, and Ross.

LADY MACDUFF 
What had he done to make him fly the land?
ROSS 
You must have patience, madam.
LADY MACDUFF  He had none.
His flight was madness. When our actions do not,
Our fears do make us traitors.
ROSS  You know not
Whether it was his wisdom or his fear.
LADY MACDUFF 
Wisdom? To leave his wife, to leave his babes,
His mansion and his titles in a place
From whence himself does fly? He loves us not;
He wants the natural touch; for the poor wren,
The most diminutive of birds, will fight,
Her young ones in her nest, against the owl.
All is the fear, and nothing is the love,
As little is the wisdom, where the flight
So runs against all reason.
ROSS  My dearest coz,
I pray you school yourself. But for your husband,
He is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows
The fits o’ th’ season. I dare not speak much
further;
But cruel are the times when we are traitors
And do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear,
But float upon a wild and violent sea
Each way and move—I take my leave of you.
Shall not be long but I’ll be here again.
Things at the worst will cease or else climb upward
To what they were before.—My pretty cousin,
Blessing upon you.
LADY MACDUFF 
Fathered he is, and yet he’s fatherless.
ROSS 
I am so much a fool, should I stay longer
It would be my disgrace and your discomfort.
I take my leave at once.Ross exits.
LADY MACDUFF  Sirrah, your father’s dead.
And what will you do now? How will you live?
SON 
As birds do, mother.
LADY MACDUFF  What, with worms and flies?
SON 
With what I get, I mean; and so do they.
LADY MACDUFF 
Poor bird, thou ’dst never fear the net nor lime,
The pitfall nor the gin.
SON 
Why should I, mother? Poor birds they are not set
for.
My father is not dead, for all your saying.
LADY MACDUFF 
Yes, he is dead. How wilt thou do for a father?
SON  Nay, how will you do for a husband?
LADY MACDUFF 
Why, I can buy me twenty at any market.
SON  Then you’ll buy ’em to sell again.
LADY MACDUFF  Thou speak’st with all thy wit,
And yet, i’ faith, with wit enough for thee.
SON  Was my father a traitor, mother?
LADY MACDUFF  Ay, that he was.
SON  What is a traitor?
LADY MACDUFF  Why, one that swears and lies.
SON  And be all traitors that do so?
LADY MACDUFF  Every one that does so is a traitor
and must be hanged.
SON  And must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
LADY MACDUFF  Every one.
SON  Who must hang them?
LADY MACDUFF  Why, the honest men.
SON  Then the liars and swearers are fools, for there
are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest
men and hang up them.
LADY MACDUFF  Now God help thee, poor monkey! But
how wilt thou do for a father?
SON  If he were dead, you’d weep for him. If you would
not, it were a good sign that I should quickly have a
new father.
LADY MACDUFF  Poor prattler, how thou talk’st!

Enter a Messenger.

MESSENGER 
Bless you, fair dame. I am not to you known,
Though in your state of honor I am perfect.
I doubt some danger does approach you nearly.
If you will take a homely man’s advice,
Be not found here. Hence with your little ones!
To fright you thus methinks I am too savage;
To do worse to you were fell cruelty,
Which is too nigh your person. Heaven preserve
you!
I dare abide no longer.Messenger exits.
LADY MACDUFF  Whither should I fly?
I have done no harm. But I remember now
I am in this earthly world, where to do harm
Is often laudable, to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Why then, alas,
Do I put up that womanly defense
To say I have done no harm?

Enter Murderers.

What are these faces?
MURDERER  Where is your husband?
LADY MACDUFF 
I hope in no place so unsanctified
Where such as thou mayst find him.
MURDERER  He’s a traitor.
SON 
Thou liest, thou shag-eared villain!
MURDERER  What, you egg?
Stabbing him. Young fry of treachery!
SON  He has killed
me, mother.
Run away, I pray you.
Lady Macduff exits, crying “Murder!” followed by the
Murderers bearing the Son’s body.



Scene 3
Enter Malcolm and Macduff.

MALCOLM 
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there
Weep our sad bosoms empty.
MACDUFF  Let us rather
Hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men,
Bestride our downfall’n birthdom. Each new morn
New widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yelled out
Like syllable of dolor.
MALCOLM  What I believe, I’ll wail;
What know, believe; and what I can redress,
As I shall find the time to friend, I will.
What you have spoke, it may be so, perchance.
This tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest. You have loved him well.
He hath not touched you yet. I am young, but
something
You may deserve of him through me, and wisdom
To offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb
T’ appease an angry god.
MACDUFF 
I am not treacherous.
MALCOLM  But Macbeth is.
A good and virtuous nature may recoil
In an imperial charge. But I shall crave your
pardon.
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose.
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell.
Though all things foul would wear the brows of
grace,
Yet grace must still look so.
MACDUFF  I have lost my hopes.
MALCOLM 
Perchance even there where I did find my doubts.
Why in that rawness left you wife and child,
Those precious motives, those strong knots of love,
Without leave-taking? I pray you,
Let not my jealousies be your dishonors,
But mine own safeties. You may be rightly just,
Whatever I shall think.
MACDUFF  Bleed, bleed, poor country!
Great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodness dare not check thee. Wear thou thy
wrongs;
The title is affeered.—Fare thee well, lord.
I would not be the villain that thou think’st
For the whole space that’s in the tyrant’s grasp,
And the rich East to boot.
MALCOLM  Be not offended.
I speak not as in absolute fear of you.
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke.
It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think withal
There would be hands uplifted in my right;
And here from gracious England have I offer
Of goodly thousands. But, for all this,
When I shall tread upon the tyrant’s head
Or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country
Shall have more vices than it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,
By him that shall succeed.
MACDUFF  What should he be?
MALCOLM 
It is myself I mean, in whom I know
All the particulars of vice so grafted
That, when they shall be opened, black Macbeth
Will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state
Esteem him as a lamb, being compared
With my confineless harms.
MACDUFF  Not in the legions
Of horrid hell can come a devil more damned
In evils to top Macbeth.
MALCOLM  I grant him bloody,
Luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful,
Sudden, malicious, smacking of every sin
That has a name. But there’s no bottom, none,
In my voluptuousness. Your wives, your daughters,
Your matrons, and your maids could not fill up
The cistern of my lust, and my desire
All continent impediments would o’erbear
That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth
Than such an one to reign.
MACDUFF  Boundless intemperance
In nature is a tyranny. It hath been
Th’ untimely emptying of the happy throne
And fall of many kings. But fear not yet
To take upon you what is yours. You may
Convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty
And yet seem cold—the time you may so hoodwink.
We have willing dames enough. There cannot be
That vulture in you to devour so many
As will to greatness dedicate themselves,
Finding it so inclined.
MALCOLM  With this there grows
In my most ill-composed affection such
A stanchless avarice that, were I king,
I should cut off the nobles for their lands,
Desire his jewels, and this other’s house;
And my more-having would be as a sauce
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
Quarrels unjust against the good and loyal,
Destroying them for wealth.
MACDUFF  This avarice
Sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root
Than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been
The sword of our slain kings. Yet do not fear.
Scotland hath foisons to fill up your will
Of your mere own. All these are portable,
With other graces weighed.
MALCOLM 
But I have none. The king-becoming graces,
As justice, verity, temp’rance, stableness,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude,
I have no relish of them but abound
In the division of each several crime,
Acting it many ways. Nay, had I power, I should
Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell,
Uproar the universal peace, confound
All unity on earth.
MACDUFF  O Scotland, Scotland!
MALCOLM 
If such a one be fit to govern, speak.
I am as I have spoken.
MACDUFF  Fit to govern?
No, not to live.—O nation miserable,
With an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered,
When shalt thou see thy wholesome days again,
Since that the truest issue of thy throne
By his own interdiction stands accursed
And does blaspheme his breed?—Thy royal father
Was a most sainted king. The queen that bore thee,
Oft’ner upon her knees than on her feet,
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well.
These evils thou repeat’st upon thyself
Hath banished me from Scotland.—O my breast,
Thy hope ends here!
MALCOLM  Macduff, this noble passion,
Child of integrity, hath from my soul
Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts
To thy good truth and honor. Devilish Macbeth
By many of these trains hath sought to win me
Into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me
From overcredulous haste. But God above
Deal between thee and me, for even now
I put myself to thy direction and
Unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure
The taints and blames I laid upon myself
For strangers to my nature. I am yet
Unknown to woman, never was forsworn,
Scarcely have coveted what was mine own,
At no time broke my faith, would not betray
The devil to his fellow, and delight
No less in truth than life. My first false speaking
Was this upon myself. What I am truly
Is thine and my poor country’s to command—
Whither indeed, before thy here-approach,
Old Siward with ten thousand warlike men,
Already at a point, was setting forth.
Now we’ll together, and the chance of goodness
Be like our warranted quarrel. Why are you silent?
MACDUFF 
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
’Tis hard to reconcile.

Enter a Doctor.

MALCOLM  Well, more anon.—
Comes the King forth, I pray you?
DOCTOR 
Ay, sir. There are a crew of wretched souls
That stay his cure. Their malady convinces
The great assay of art, but at his touch
(Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand)
They presently amend.
MALCOLM  I thank you, doctor.
Doctor exits.
MACDUFF 
What’s the disease he means?
MALCOLM  ’Tis called the evil:
A most miraculous work in this good king,
Which often since my here-remain in England
I have seen him do. How he solicits heaven
Himself best knows, but strangely visited people
All swoll’n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye,
The mere despair of surgery, he cures,
Hanging a golden stamp about their necks,
Put on with holy prayers; and, ’tis spoken,
To the succeeding royalty he leaves
The healing benediction. With this strange virtue,
He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy,
And sundry blessings hang about his throne
That speak him full of grace.

Enter Ross.

MACDUFF  See who comes here.
MALCOLM 
My countryman, but yet I know him not.
MACDUFF 
My ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.
MALCOLM 
I know him now.—Good God betimes remove
The means that makes us strangers!
ROSS  Sir, amen.
MACDUFF 
Stands Scotland where it did?
ROSS  Alas, poor country,
Almost afraid to know itself. It cannot
Be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing
But who knows nothing is once seen to smile;
Where sighs and groans and shrieks that rent the air
Are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems
A modern ecstasy. The dead man’s knell
Is there scarce asked for who, and good men’s lives
Expire before the flowers in their caps,
Dying or ere they sicken.
MACDUFF 
O relation too nice and yet too true!
MALCOLM  What’s the newest grief?
ROSS 
That of an hour’s age doth hiss the speaker.
Each minute teems a new one.
MACDUFF  How does my wife?
ROSS  Why, well.
MACDUFF  And all my children?
ROSS  Well too.
MACDUFF 
The tyrant has not battered at their peace?
ROSS 
No, they were well at peace when I did leave ’em.
MACDUFF 
Be not a niggard of your speech. How goes ’t?
ROSS 
When I came hither to transport the tidings
Which I have heavily borne, there ran a rumor
Of many worthy fellows that were out;
Which was to my belief witnessed the rather
For that I saw the tyrant’s power afoot.
Now is the time of help. Your eye in Scotland
Would create soldiers, make our women fight
To doff their dire distresses.
MALCOLM  Be ’t their comfort
We are coming thither. Gracious England hath
Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men;
An older and a better soldier none
That Christendom gives out.
ROSS  Would I could answer
This comfort with the like. But I have words
That would be howled out in the desert air,
Where hearing should not latch them.
MACDUFF  What concern
they—
The general cause, or is it a fee-grief
Due to some single breast?
ROSS  No mind that’s honest
But in it shares some woe, though the main part
Pertains to you alone.
MACDUFF  If it be mine,
Keep it not from me. Quickly let me have it.
ROSS 
Let not your ears despise my tongue forever,
Which shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.
MACDUFF  Hum! I guess at it.
ROSS 
Your castle is surprised, your wife and babes
Savagely slaughtered. To relate the manner
Were on the quarry of these murdered deer
To add the death of you.
MALCOLM  Merciful heaven!—
What, man, ne’er pull your hat upon your brows.
Give sorrow words. The grief that does not speak
Whispers the o’erfraught heart and bids it break.
MACDUFF  My children too?
ROSS 
Wife, children, servants, all that could be found.
MACDUFF 
And I must be from thence? My wife killed too?
ROSS  I have said.
MALCOLM  Be comforted.
Let’s make us med’cines of our great revenge
To cure this deadly grief.
MACDUFF 
He has no children. All my pretty ones?
Did you say “all”? O hell-kite! All?
What, all my pretty chickens and their dam
At one fell swoop?
MALCOLM  Dispute it like a man.
MACDUFF  I shall do so,
But I must also feel it as a man.
I cannot but remember such things were
That were most precious to me. Did heaven look on
And would not take their part? Sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee! Naught that I am,
Not for their own demerits, but for mine,
Fell slaughter on their souls. Heaven rest them now.
MALCOLM 
Be this the whetstone of your sword. Let grief
Convert to anger. Blunt not the heart; enrage it.
MACDUFF 
O, I could play the woman with mine eyes
And braggart with my tongue! But, gentle heavens,
Cut short all intermission! Front to front
Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself.
Within my sword’s length set him. If he ’scape,
Heaven forgive him too.
MALCOLM  This tune goes manly.
Come, go we to the King. Our power is ready;
Our lack is nothing but our leave. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the powers above
Put on their instruments. Receive what cheer you
may.
The night is long that never finds the day.
They exit.



ACT 5
Scene 1
Enter a Doctor of Physic and a Waiting-Gentlewoman.

DOCTOR 
I have two nights watched with you but can
perceive no truth in your report. When was it she
last walked?
GENTLEWOMAN  Since his Majesty went into the field, I
have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown
upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper,
fold it, write upon ’t, read it, afterwards seal it, and
again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast
sleep.
DOCTOR  A great perturbation in nature, to receive at
once the benefit of sleep and do the effects of
watching. In this slumb’ry agitation, besides her
walking and other actual performances, what at any
time have you heard her say?
GENTLEWOMAN  That, sir, which I will not report after
her.
DOCTOR  You may to me, and ’tis most meet you
should.
GENTLEWOMAN  Neither to you nor anyone, having no
witness to confirm my speech.

Enter Lady Macbeth with a taper.

Lo you, here she comes. This is her very guise and,
upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close.
DOCTOR  How came she by that light?
GENTLEWOMAN  Why, it stood by her. She has light by
her continually. ’Tis her command.
DOCTOR  You see her eyes are open.
GENTLEWOMAN  Ay, but their sense are shut.
DOCTOR  What is it she does now? Look how she rubs
her hands.
GENTLEWOMAN  It is an accustomed action with her to
seem thus washing her hands. I have known her
continue in this a quarter of an hour.
LADY MACBETH  Yet here’s a spot.
DOCTOR  Hark, she speaks. I will set down what comes
from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more
strongly.
LADY MACBETH  Out, damned spot, out, I say! One. Two.
Why then, ’tis time to do ’t. Hell is murky. Fie, my
lord, fie, a soldier and afeard? What need we fear
who knows it, when none can call our power to
account? Yet who would have thought the old man
to have had so much blood in him?
DOCTOR  Do you mark that?
LADY MACBETH  The Thane of Fife had a wife. Where is
she now? What, will these hands ne’er be clean? No
more o’ that, my lord, no more o’ that. You mar all
with this starting.
DOCTOR  Go to, go to. You have known what you should
not.
GENTLEWOMAN  She has spoke what she should not,
I am sure of that. Heaven knows what she has
known.
LADY MACBETH  Here’s the smell of the blood still. All
the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little
hand. O, O, O!
DOCTOR  What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely
charged.
GENTLEWOMAN  I would not have such a heart in my
bosom for the dignity of the whole body.
DOCTOR  Well, well, well.
GENTLEWOMAN  Pray God it be, sir.
DOCTOR  This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have
known those which have walked in their sleep,
who have died holily in their beds.
LADY MACBETH  Wash your hands. Put on your nightgown.
Look not so pale. I tell you yet again, Banquo’s
buried; he cannot come out on ’s grave.
DOCTOR  Even so?
LADY MACBETH  To bed, to bed. There’s knocking at the
gate. Come, come, come, come. Give me your
hand. What’s done cannot be undone. To bed, to
bed, to bed.Lady Macbeth exits.
DOCTOR  Will she go now to bed?
GENTLEWOMAN  Directly.
DOCTOR 
Foul whisp’rings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles. Infected minds
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.
God, God forgive us all. Look after her.
Remove from her the means of all annoyance
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night.
My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.
I think but dare not speak.
GENTLEWOMAN 
Good night, good doctor.
They exit.


Scene 2
Drum and Colors. Enter Menteith, Caithness, Angus,
Lennox, 
and Soldiers.

MENTEITH 
The English power is near, led on by Malcolm,
His uncle Siward, and the good Macduff.
Revenges burn in them, for their dear causes
Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
Excite the mortified man.
ANGUS  Near Birnam Wood
Shall we well meet them. That way are they coming.
CAITHNESS 
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother?
LENNOX 
For certain, sir, he is not. I have a file
Of all the gentry. There is Siward’s son
And many unrough youths that even now
Protest their first of manhood.
MENTEITH  What does the tyrant?
CAITHNESS 
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies.
Some say he’s mad; others that lesser hate him
Do call it valiant fury. But for certain
He cannot buckle his distempered cause
Within the belt of rule.
ANGUS  Now does he feel
His secret murders sticking on his hands.
Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach.
Those he commands move only in command,
Nothing in love. Now does he feel his title
Hang loose about him, like a giant’s robe
Upon a dwarfish thief.
MENTEITH  Who, then, shall blame
His pestered senses to recoil and start
When all that is within him does condemn
Itself for being there?
CAITHNESS  Well, march we on
To give obedience where ’tis truly owed.
Meet we the med’cine of the sickly weal,
And with him pour we in our country’s purge
Each drop of us.
LENNOX  Or so much as it needs
To dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds.
Make we our march towards Birnam.
They exit marching.


Scene 3
Enter Macbeth, 
the Doctor, and Attendants.

MACBETH 
Bring me no more reports. Let them fly all.
Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane
I cannot taint with fear. What’s the boy Malcolm?
Was he not born of woman? The spirits that know
All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus:
“Fear not, Macbeth. No man that’s born of woman
Shall e’er have power upon thee.” Then fly, false
thanes,
And mingle with the English epicures.
The mind I sway by and the heart I bear
Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear.

Enter Servant.

The devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon!
Where got’st thou that goose-look?
SERVANT  There is ten thousand—
MACBETH  Geese, villain?
SERVANT  Soldiers, sir.
MACBETH 
Go prick thy face and over-red thy fear,
Thou lily-livered boy. What soldiers, patch?
Death of thy soul! Those linen cheeks of thine
Are counselors to fear. What soldiers, whey-face?
SERVANT  The English force, so please you.
MACBETH 
Take thy face hence.Servant exits.
Seyton!—I am sick at heart
When I behold—Seyton, I say!—This push
Will cheer me ever or disseat me now.
I have lived long enough. My way of life
Is fall’n into the sere, the yellow leaf,
And that which should accompany old age,
As honor, love, obedience, troops of friends,
I must not look to have, but in their stead
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath
Which the poor heart would fain deny and dare
not.—
Seyton!

Enter Seyton.

SEYTON 
What’s your gracious pleasure?
MACBETH  What news more?
SEYTON 
All is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.
MACBETH 
I’ll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked.
Give me my armor.
SEYTON  ’Tis not needed yet.
MACBETH  I’ll put it on.
Send out more horses. Skirr the country round.
Hang those that talk of fear. Give me mine
armor.—
How does your patient, doctor?
DOCTOR  Not so sick, my lord,
As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies
That keep her from her rest.
MACBETH  Cure her of that.
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased,
Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow,
Raze out the written troubles of the brain,
And with some sweet oblivious antidote
Cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff
Which weighs upon the heart?
DOCTOR  Therein the patient
Must minister to himself.
MACBETH 
Throw physic to the dogs. I’ll none of it.—
Come, put mine armor on. Give me my staff.
Attendants begin to arm him.
Seyton, send out.—Doctor, the thanes fly from
me.—
Come, sir, dispatch.—If thou couldst, doctor, cast
The water of my land, find her disease,
And purge it to a sound and pristine health,
I would applaud thee to the very echo
That should applaud again.—Pull ’t off, I say.—
What rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug
Would scour these English hence? Hear’st thou of
them?
DOCTOR 
Ay, my good lord. Your royal preparation
Makes us hear something.
MACBETH  Bring it after me.—
I will not be afraid of death and bane
Till Birnam Forest come to Dunsinane.
DOCTOR, aside 
Were I from Dunsinane away and clear,
Profit again should hardly draw me here.
They exit.


Scene 4
Drum and Colors. Enter Malcolm, Siward, Macduff,
Siward’s son, Menteith, Caithness, Angus, and Soldiers,
marching.

MALCOLM 
Cousins, I hope the days are near at hand
That chambers will be safe.
MENTEITH  We doubt it nothing.
SIWARD 
What wood is this before us?
MENTEITH  The Wood of Birnam.
MALCOLM 
Let every soldier hew him down a bough
And bear ’t before him. Thereby shall we shadow
The numbers of our host and make discovery
Err in report of us.
SOLDIER  It shall be done.
SIWARD 
We learn no other but the confident tyrant
Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure
Our setting down before ’t.
MALCOLM  ’Tis his main hope;
For, where there is advantage to be given,
Both more and less have given him the revolt,
And none serve with him but constrainèd things
Whose hearts are absent too.
MACDUFF  Let our just censures
Attend the true event, and put we on
Industrious soldiership.
SIWARD  The time approaches
That will with due decision make us know
What we shall say we have and what we owe.
Thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate,
But certain issue strokes must arbitrate;
Towards which, advance the war.
They exit marching.



Scene 5
Enter Macbeth, Seyton, and Soldiers, with Drum and
Colors.

MACBETH 
Hang out our banners on the outward walls.
The cry is still “They come!” Our castle’s strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn. Here let them lie
Till famine and the ague eat them up.
Were they not forced with those that should be
ours,
We might have met them dareful, beard to beard,
And beat them backward home.
A cry within of women.
What is that noise?
SEYTON 
It is the cry of women, my good lord.He exits.
MACBETH 
I have almost forgot the taste of fears.
The time has been my senses would have cooled
To hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair
Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir
As life were in ’t. I have supped full with horrors.
Direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts,
Cannot once start me.

Enter Seyton.

Wherefore was that cry?
SEYTON  The Queen, my lord, is dead.
MACBETH  She should have died hereafter.
There would have been a time for such a word.
Tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
To the last syllable of recorded time,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life’s but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more. It is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.

Enter a Messenger.

Thou com’st to use thy tongue: thy story quickly.
MESSENGER  Gracious my lord,
I should report that which I say I saw,
But know not how to do ’t.
MACBETH  Well, say, sir.
MESSENGER 
As I did stand my watch upon the hill,
I looked toward Birnam, and anon methought
The Wood began to move.
MACBETH  Liar and slave!
MESSENGER 
Let me endure your wrath if ’t be not so.
Within this three mile may you see it coming.
I say, a moving grove.
MACBETH  If thou speak’st false,
Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive
Till famine cling thee. If thy speech be sooth,
I care not if thou dost for me as much.—
I pull in resolution and begin
To doubt th’ equivocation of the fiend,
That lies like truth. “Fear not till Birnam Wood
Do come to Dunsinane,” and now a wood
Comes toward Dunsinane.—Arm, arm, and out!—
If this which he avouches does appear,
There is nor flying hence nor tarrying here.
I ’gin to be aweary of the sun
And wish th’ estate o’ th’ world were now
undone.—
Ring the alarum bell!—Blow wind, come wrack,
At least we’ll die with harness on our back.
They exit.


Scene 6
Drum and Colors. Enter Malcolm, Siward, Macduff, and
their army, with boughs.

MALCOLM 
Now near enough. Your leafy screens throw down
And show like those you are.—You, worthy uncle,
Shall with my cousin, your right noble son,
Lead our first battle. Worthy Macduff and we
Shall take upon ’s what else remains to do,
According to our order.
SIWARD  Fare you well.
Do we but find the tyrant’s power tonight,
Let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
MACDUFF 
Make all our trumpets speak; give them all breath,
Those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
They exit.
Alarums continued.


Scene 7
Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH 
They have tied me to a stake. I cannot fly,
But, bear-like, I must fight the course. What’s he
That was not born of woman? Such a one
Am I to fear, or none.

Enter young Siward.

YOUNG SIWARD  What is thy name?
MACBETH  Thou ’lt be afraid to hear it.
YOUNG SIWARD 
No, though thou call’st thyself a hotter name
Than any is in hell.
MACBETH  My name’s Macbeth.
YOUNG SIWARD 
The devil himself could not pronounce a title
More hateful to mine ear.
MACBETH  No, nor more fearful.
YOUNG SIWARD 
Thou liest, abhorrèd tyrant. With my sword
I’ll prove the lie thou speak’st.
They fight, and young Siward is slain.
MACBETH  Thou wast born of
woman.
But swords I smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
Brandished by man that’s of a woman born.
He exits.

Alarums. Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF 
That way the noise is. Tyrant, show thy face!
If thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine,
My wife and children’s ghosts will haunt me still.
I cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms
Are hired to bear their staves. Either thou, Macbeth,
Or else my sword with an unbattered edge
I sheathe again undeeded. There thou shouldst be;
By this great clatter, one of greatest note
Seems bruited. Let me find him, Fortune,
And more I beg not.He exits. Alarums.

Enter Malcolm and Siward.

SIWARD 
This way, my lord. The castle’s gently rendered.
The tyrant’s people on both sides do fight,
The noble thanes do bravely in the war,
The day almost itself professes yours,
And little is to do.
MALCOLM  We have met with foes
That strike beside us.
SIWARD 
Enter, sir, the castle.
They exit. Alarum.


Scene 8Enter Macbeth.

MACBETH 
Why should I play the Roman fool and die
On mine own sword? Whiles I see lives, the gashes
Do better upon them.

Enter Macduff.

MACDUFF  Turn, hellhound, turn!
MACBETH 
Of all men else I have avoided thee.
But get thee back. My soul is too much charged
With blood of thine already.
MACDUFF  I have no words;
My voice is in my sword, thou bloodier villain
Than terms can give thee out.Fight. Alarum.
MACBETH  Thou losest labor.
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air
With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed.
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests;
I bear a charmèd life, which must not yield
To one of woman born.
MACDUFF  Despair thy charm,
And let the angel whom thou still hast served
Tell thee Macduff was from his mother’s womb
Untimely ripped.
MACBETH 
Accursèd be that tongue that tells me so,
For it hath cowed my better part of man!
And be these juggling fiends no more believed
That palter with us in a double sense,
That keep the word of promise to our ear
And break it to our hope. I’ll not fight with thee.
MACDUFF  Then yield thee, coward,
And live to be the show and gaze o’ th’ time.
We’ll have thee, as our rarer monsters are,
Painted upon a pole, and underwrit
“Here may you see the tyrant.”
MACBETH  I will not yield
To kiss the ground before young Malcolm’s feet
And to be baited with the rabble’s curse.
Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane
And thou opposed, being of no woman born,
Yet I will try the last. Before my body
I throw my warlike shield. Lay on, Macduff,
And damned be him that first cries “Hold! Enough!”
They exit fighting. Alarums.

They enter fighting, and Macbeth is slain. Macduff
exits carrying off Macbeth’s body. Retreat and flourish.
Enter, with Drum and Colors, Malcolm, Siward, Ross,
Thanes, and Soldiers.

MALCOLM 
I would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
SIWARD 
Some must go off; and yet by these I see
So great a day as this is cheaply bought.
MALCOLM 
Macduff is missing, and your noble son.
ROSS 
Your son, my lord, has paid a soldier’s debt.
He only lived but till he was a man,
The which no sooner had his prowess confirmed
In the unshrinking station where he fought,
But like a man he died.
SIWARD  Then he is dead?
ROSS 
Ay, and brought off the field. Your cause of sorrow
Must not be measured by his worth, for then
It hath no end.
SIWARD  Had he his hurts before?
ROSS 
Ay, on the front.
SIWARD  Why then, God’s soldier be he!
Had I as many sons as I have hairs,
I would not wish them to a fairer death;
And so his knell is knolled.
MALCOLM 
He’s worth more sorrow, and that I’ll spend for
him.
SIWARD  He’s worth no more.
They say he parted well and paid his score,
And so, God be with him. Here comes newer
comfort.

Enter Macduff with Macbeth’s head.

MACDUFF 
Hail, King! for so thou art. Behold where stands
Th’ usurper’s cursèd head. The time is free.
I see thee compassed with thy kingdom’s pearl,
That speak my salutation in their minds,
Whose voices I desire aloud with mine.
Hail, King of Scotland!
ALL  Hail, King of Scotland!Flourish.
MALCOLM 
We shall not spend a large expense of time
Before we reckon with your several loves
And make us even with you. My thanes and
kinsmen,
Henceforth be earls, the first that ever Scotland
In such an honor named. What’s more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
As calling home our exiled friends abroad
That fled the snares of watchful tyranny,
Producing forth the cruel ministers
Of this dead butcher and his fiend-like queen
(Who, as ’tis thought, by self and violent hands,
Took off her life)—this, and what needful else
That calls upon us, by the grace of grace,
We will perform in measure, time, and place.
So thanks to all at once and to each one,
Whom we invite to see us crowned at Scone.
Flourish. All exit.
